105©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTProject Scope Management includes the processes required to ensure that the project includes all the work 
required, and only the work required, to complete the project successfully. Managing the project scope is primarily 

concerned with de˜ning and controlling what is and is not included in the project.
Figure 5-1 provides an overview of the Project Scope Management processes, which include the following:
5.1  Plan Scope ManagementŠThe process of creating a scope management plan that documents how 

the project scope will be de˜ned, validated, and controlled.
5.2  Collect RequirementsŠThe process of determining, documenting, and managing stakeholder needs 
and requirements to meet project objectives.5.3 Define ScopeŠThe process of developing a detailed description of the project and product.5.4  Create WBS
ŠThe process of subdividing project deliverables and project work into smaller, more 
manageable components.
5.5 Validate Scope
ŠThe process of formalizing acceptance of the completed project deliverables.
5.6  Control Scope
ŠThe process of monitoring the status of the project and product scope and managing 
changes to the scope baseline.These processes interact with each other and with processes in other Knowledge Areas as described in detail 
in Section 3 and Annex A1.
In the project context, the term scope can refer to:
Product scope. 
The features and functions that characterize a product, service, or result; and/or
 Project scope.
 The work performed to deliver a product, service, or result with the speci˜ed features and 

functions. The term project scope is sometimes viewed as including product scope.
The processes used to manage project scope, as well as the supporting tools and techniques, can vary 
by project. The scope baseline for the project is the approved version of the project scope statement, work 

breakdown structure (WBS), and its associated WBS dictionary. A baseline can be changed only through formal 

change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison while performing Validate Scope and Control 

Scope processes as well as other controlling processes.55Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.106©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTCompletion of the project scope is measured against the project management plan (Section 4.2.3.1). Completion 
of the product scope is measured against the product requirements (Section 5.2). The Project Scope Management 

processes need to be well integrated with the other Knowledge Area processes, so that the work of the project will 

result in delivery of the speci˜ed product scope.
.1 Inputs
 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Project charter
 .3 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
 .4 Organizational process assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Meetings
 .3 Outputs
 .1 Scope management plan
 .2 Requirements management  
  plan
.1 Inputs

 .1 Scope management plan
 .2 Requirements management  
  plan

 .3 Stakeholder management plan
 .4 Project charter
 .5 Stakeholder register
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Interviews

 .2 Focus groups

 .3 Facilitated workshops

 .4 Group creativity techniques

 .5 Group decision-making  

   techniques

 .6 Questionnaires and surveys

 .7 Observations

 .8 Prototypes

 .9 Benchmarking

    .10 Context diagrams

    .11 Document analysis
 .3 Outputs
 .1 Requirements documentation
 .2 Requirements traceability  
  matrix
.1 Inputs

 .1 Scope management plan
 .2 Project charter
 .3 Requirements documentation
 .4 Organizational process assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Product analysis
 .3 Alternatives generation
 .4 Facilitated workshops
 .3 Outputs
 .1 Project scope statement
 .2  Project documents updates
.1 Inputs

 .1 Scope management plan
 .2 Project scope statement
 .3 Requirements documentation
 .4 Enterprise environmental   
   factors
 .5 Organizational process 
  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Decomposition
 .2 Expert judgment
.3 Outputs

 .1 Scope baseline
 .2 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs

 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Requirements documentation
 .3 Requirements traceability  
  matrix

 .4 Verified deliverables

 .5 Work performance data
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Inspection
 .2 Group decision-making  
  techniques
.3 Outputs

 .1 Accepted deliverables
 .2 Change requests
 .3 Work performance information

 .4 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs

 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Requirements documentation
 .3 Requirements traceability  
  matrix

 .4 Work performance data

 .5 Organizational process assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Variance analysis
.3 Outputs

 .1 Work performance   
  information

 .2 Change requests
 .3 Project management plan  
  updates

 .4 Project documents updates
 .5 Organizational process assets  
  updates
Project Scope ManagementOverview5.2 Collect Requirements
5.1 Plan ScopeManagement5.3 Define Scope5.4 Create WBS5.5 Validate Scope
5.6 Control ScopeFigure 5-1. Project Scope Management 
Overview
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.107©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.1 Plan Scope ManagementPlan Scope Management is the process of creating a scope management plan that documents how the project 
scope will be de˜ned, validated, and controlled. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides guidance and 

direction on how scope will be managed throughout the project. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of 

this process are depicted in Figure 5-2. Figure 5-3 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Project charter
.3 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Meetings
.1 Scope management plan
.2 Requirements   
 management plan
Figure 5-2. Plan Scope Management: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
Outputs5.1Plan ScopeManagement5.2CollectRequirements5.3DefineScope5.4CreateWBSProject Scope ManagementEnterprise/
Organization4.1Develop ProjectCharter
4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlanPProject




R



O

Figure 5-3. Plan Scope Management 
Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.108©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTThe scope management plan is a component of the project or program management plan that describes how the 
scope will be de˜ned, developed, monitored, controlled, and veri˜ed. The development of the scope management 

plan and the detailing of the project scope begin with the analysis of information contained in the project charter 

(Section 4.1.3.1), the latest approved subsidiary plans of the project management plan (Section 4.2.3.1), historical 

information contained in the organizational process assets (Section 2.1.4), and any other relevant enterprise 

environmental factors (Section 2.1.5). This plan helps reduce the risk of project scope creep.
5.1.1 Plan Scope Management: Inputs5.1.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. Approved subsidiary plans of the project management plan are used to create the 
scope management plan and in˚uence the approach taken for planning scope and managing project scope.
5.1.1.2 Project CharterDescribed in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter is used to provide the project context needed to plan the scope 
management processes. It provides the high-level project description and product characteristics from the project 

statement of work.
5.1.1.3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that can in˚uence the Plan Scope Management 
process include, but are not limited to:
Organization™s culture,
Infrastructure,Personnel administration, and
Marketplace conditions.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.109©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.1.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Plan Scope Management 
process include, but are not limited to:
Policies and procedures, and
Historical information and lessons learned knowledge base.
5.1.2 Plan Scope Management: Tools and Techniques5.1.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment refers to input received from knowledgeable and experienced parties. Expertise may be 
provided by any group or person with specialized education, knowledge, skill, experience, or training in developing 

scope management plans.
5.1.2.2 MeetingsProject teams may attend project meetings to develop the scope management plan. Attendees at these 
meetings may include the project manager, the project sponsor, selected project team members, selected 

stakeholders, anyone with responsibility for any of the scope management processes, and others as needed.
5.1.3 Plan Scope Management: Outputs5.1.3.1 Scope Management PlanThe scope management plan is a component of the project or program management plan that describes how the 
scope will be de˜ned, developed, monitored, controlled, and veri˜ed. The scope management plan is a major input 

into the Develop Project Management Plan process, and the other scope management processes. The components 

of a scope management plan include:
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.110©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTProcess for preparing a detailed project scope statement;
Process that enables the creation of the WBS from the detailed project scope statement;
Process that establishes how the WBS will be maintained and approved;
Process that speci˜es how formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables will be obtained; and
 Process to control how requests for changes to the detailed project scope statement will be processed. 

This process is directly linked to the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5).
The scope management plan can be formal or informal, broadly framed or highly detailed, based on the needs 
of the project.5.1.3.2 Requirements Management PlanThe requirements management plan is a component of the project management plan that describes how 
requirements will be analyzed, documented, and managed. The phase-to-phase relationship, described in 

Section 2.4.2.1, strongly in˚uences how requirements are managed. The project manager chooses the most 
effective relationship for the project and documents this approach in the requirements management plan. Many of 

the requirements management plan components are based on that relationship.
Components of the requirements management plan can include, but are not limited to:
How requirements activities will be planned, tracked, and reported;
 Con˜guration management activities such as: how changes to the product will be initiated, how impacts 

will be analyzed, how they will be traced, tracked, and reported, as well as the authorization levels 

required to approve these changes;
Requirements prioritization process;
Product metrics that will be used and the rationale for using them; and
Traceability structure to re˚ect which requirement attributes will be captured on the traceability matrix.
5.2 Collect RequirementsCollect Requirements is the process of determining, documenting, and managing stakeholder needs and 
requirements to meet project objectives. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides the basis for de˜ning and 

managing the project scope including product scope. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process 

are depicted in Figure 5-4. Figure 5-5 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.111©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Scope management plan
.2 Requirements   
 management plan
.3 Stakeholder management  
 plan
.4 Project charter
.5 Stakeholder register
 .1 Interviews
 .2 Focus groups
 .3 Facilitated workshops
 .4 Group creativity   
  techniques
 .5 Group decision-making   
  techniques
 .6 Questionnaires and   
  surveys
 .7 Observations
 .8 Prototypes
 .9 Benchmarking
 .10 Context diagrams
 .11 Document analysis
.1 Requirements   
 documentation
.2 Requirements traceability  

 matrix
Figure 5-4. 
Collect Requirements: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
Outputs CgProject Scope Management5.2CollectRequirements5.1Plan ScopeManagement5.3DefineScope5.4CreateWBS5.5Validate
Scope5.6ControlScope


r

R
nR

R
x13.1IdentifyStakeholders
13.2PlanStakeholder
Management8.1Plan QualityManagement12.1PlanProcurementManagement4.1 Develop ProjectCharter
Figure 5-5. 
Collect Requirements Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.112©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTThe project™s success is directly in˚uenced by active stakeholder involvement in the discovery and decomposition 
of needs into requirements and by the care taken in determining, documenting, and managing the requirements 

of the product, service, or result of the project. Requirements include conditions or capabilities that are to be 

met by the project or present in the product, service, or result to satisfy an agreement or other formally imposed 

speci˜cation. Requirements include the quanti˜ed and documented needs and expectations of the sponsor, 

customer, and other stakeholders. These requirements need to be elicited, analyzed, and recorded in enough detail 

to be included in the scope baseline and to be measured once project execution begins. Requirements become 

the foundation of the WBS. Cost, schedule, quality planning, and sometimes procurement are all based upon 

these requirements. The development of requirements begins with an analysis of the information contained in the 

project charter (Section 4.1.3.1), the stakeholder register (Section 13.1.3.1) and the stakeholder management plan 
(Section 13.2.3.1).Many organizations categorize requirements into different types, such as business and technical solutions, the 
former referring to stakeholder needs and the latter as to how those needs will be implemented. Requirements can 

be grouped into classi˜cations allowing for further re˜nement and detail as the requirements are elaborated. These 

classi˜cations include:
 Business requirements, which describe the higher-level needs of the organization as a whole, such as the 

business issues or opportunities, and reasons why a project has been undertaken.
Stakeholder requirements, which describe needs of a stakeholder or stakeholder group.
 Solution requirements, which describe features, functions, and characteristics of the product, service, 

or result that will meet the business and stakeholder requirements. Solution requirements are further 

grouped into functional and nonfunctional requirements: ˜ Functional requirements describe the behaviors of the product. Examples include processes, 

data, and interactions with the product.
 ˜ Nonfunctional requirements supplement functional requirements and describe the environmental 
conditions or qualities required for the product to be effective. Examples include: reliability, 

security, performance, safety, level of service, supportability, retention/purge, etc.
 Transition requirements describe temporary capabilities, such as data conversion and training 

requirements, needed to transition from the current ﬁas-isﬂ state to the future ﬁto-beﬂ state.
 Project requirements, which describe the actions, processes, or other conditions the project needs  
to meet. Quality requirements, which capture any condition or criteria needed to validate the successful completion 

of a project deliverable or ful˜llment of other project requirements.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.113©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.2.1 Collect Requirements: Inputs5.2.1.1 Scope Management PlanDescribed in Section 5.1.3.1. The scope management plan provides clarity as to how project teams will determine 
which type of requirements need to be collected for the project.5.2.1.2 Requirements Management PlanDescribed in Section 5.1.3.2. The requirements management plan provides the processes that will be used 
throughout the Collect Requirements process to de˜ne and document the stakeholder needs.5.2.1.3 Stakeholder Management PlanDescribed in Section 13.2.3.1. The stakeholder management plan is used to understand stakeholder 
communication requirements and the level of stakeholder engagement in order to assess and adapt to the level of 

stakeholder participation in requirements activities.
5.2.1.4 Project CharterDescribed in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter is used to provide the high-level description of the product, 
service, or result of the project so that detailed requirements can be developed.
5.2.1.5 Stakeholder RegisterDescribed in Section 13.1.3.1. The stakeholder register is used to identify stakeholders who can provide 
information on the requirements. The stakeholder register also captures major requirements and main expectations 

stakeholders may have for the project.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.114©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.2.2 Collect Requirements: Tools and Techniques5.2.2.1 Interviews
An interview is a formal or informal approach to elicit information from stakeholders by talking to them directly. 
It is typically performed by asking prepared and spontaneous questions and recording the responses. Interviews 

are often conducted on an individual basis between an interviewer and an interviewee, but may involve multiple 

interviewers and/or multiple interviewees. Interviewing experienced project participants, sponsors and other 

executives, and subject matter experts can aid in identifying and de˜ning the features and functions of the desired 

product deliverables. Interviews are also useful for obtaining con˜dential information.
5.2.2.2 Focus GroupsFocus groups bring together prequali˜ed stakeholders and subject matter experts to learn about their 
expectations and attitudes about a proposed product, service, or result. A trained moderator guides the group 

through an interactive discussion, designed to be more conversational than a one-on-one interview.
5.2.2.3 Facilitated Workshops
Facilitated workshops are focused sessions that bring key stakeholders together to de˜ne product requirements. 
Workshops are considered a primary technique for quickly de˜ning cross-functional requirements and reconciling 

stakeholder differences. Because of their interactive group nature, well-facilitated sessions can build trust, foster 

relationships, and improve communication among the participants, which can lead to increased stakeholder 

consensus. In addition, issues can be discovered earlier and resolved more quickly than in individual sessions.
For example, facilitated workshops called joint application design/development (JAD) sessions are used in the 
software development industry. These facilitated sessions focus on bringing business subject matter experts and 

the development team together to improve the software development process. In the manufacturing industry, quality 

function deployment (QFD) is another example of a facilitated workshop technique that helps determine critical 

characteristics for new product development. QFD starts by collecting customer needs, also known as voice of the 

customer (VOC). These needs are then objectively sorted and prioritized, and goals are set for achieving them. User 

stories, which are short, textual descriptions of required functionality, are often developed during a requirements 

workshop. User stories describe the stakeholder who bene˜ts from the feature (role), what the stakeholder needs to 

accomplish (goal), and the bene˜t to the stakeholder (motivation). User stories are widely used with agile methods.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.115©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.2.2.4 Group Creativity TechniquesSeveral group activities can be organized to identify project and product requirements. Some of the group 
creativity techniques that can be used are:
 Brainstorming. 
A technique used to generate and collect multiple ideas related to project and product 
requirements. Although brainstorming by itself does not include voting or prioritization, it is often used 

with other group creativity techniques that do.
 N
ominal group technique. A technique that enhances brainstorming with a voting process used to rank 
the most useful ideas for further brainstorming or for prioritization.
 Idea/mind mapping. 
A technique in which ideas created through individual brainstorming sessions are 
consolidated into a single map to re˚ect commonality and differences in understanding, and generate 

new ideas. Affinity diagram.
 A technique that allows large numbers of ideas to be classi˜ed into groups for review 

and analysis. Multicriteria decision analysis. A technique that utilizes a decision matrix to provide a systematic 

analytical approach for establishing criteria, such as risk levels, uncertainty, and valuation, to evaluate 

and rank many ideas.
5.2.2.5 Group Decision-Making TechniquesA group decision-making technique is an assessment process having multiple alternatives with an expected 
outcome in the form of future actions. These techniques can be used to generate, classify, and prioritize product 

requirements.There are various methods of reaching a group decision, such as:
 Unanimity. 
A decision that is reached whereby everyone agrees on a single course of action. One way to 
reach unanimity is the Delphi technique, in which a selected group of experts answers questionnaires and 

provides feedback regarding the responses from each round of requirements gathering. The responses 

are only available to the facilitator to maintain anonymity.
 Majority.
 A decision that is reached with support obtained from more than 50 % of the members of the 

group. Having a group size with an uneven number of participants can ensure that a decision will be 

reached, rather than resulting in a tie.
 Plurality. 
A decision that is reached whereby the largest block in a group decides, even if a majority is 
not achieved. This method is generally used when the number of options nominated is more than two.
Dictatorship. 
In this method, one individual makes the decision for the group.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.116©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTAll of these group decision-making techniques can be applied to the group creativity techniques used in the 
Collect Requirements process. 
5.2.2.6 Questionnaires and Surveys
Questionnaires and surveys are written sets of questions designed to quickly accumulate information from a 
large number of respondents. Questionnaires and/or surveys are most appropriate with varied audiences, when 

a quick turnaround is needed, when respondents are geographically dispersed, and where statistical analysis is 

appropriate.
5.2.2.7 Observations
Observations provide a direct way of viewing individuals in their environment and how they perform their jobs or 
tasks and carry out processes. It is particularly helpful for detailed processes when the people that use the product 

have dif˜culty or are reluctant to articulate their requirements. Observation is also known as ﬁjob shadowing.ﬂ 

It is usually done externally by an observer viewing a business expert performing a job. It can also be done by 

a ﬁparticipant observerﬂ who actually performs a process or procedure to experience how it is done to uncover 

hidden requirements.5.2.2.8 PrototypesPrototyping is a method of obtaining early feedback on requirements by providing a working model of the expected product before actually building it. Since a prototype is tangible, it allows stakeholders to experiment 

with a model of the ˜nal product rather than being limited to discussing abstract representations of their 

requirements. Prototypes support the concept of progressive elaboration in iterative cycles of mock-up creation, 

user experimentation, feedback generation, and prototype revision. When enough feedback cycles have been 

performed, the requirements obtained from the prototype are suf˜ciently complete to move to a design or build 

phase. Storyboarding is a prototyping technique showing sequence or navigation through a series of images or 

illustrations. Storyboards are used on a variety of projects in a variety of industries, such as ˜lm, advertising, 

instructional design, and on agile and other software development projects. In software development, storyboards 

use mock-ups to show navigation paths through webpages, screens, or other user interfaces.
5.2.2.9 BenchmarkingBenchmarking involves comparing actual or planned practices, such as processes and operations, to those 
of comparable organizations to identify best practices, generate ideas for improvement, and provide a basis for 

measuring performance. The organizations compared during benchmarking can be internal or external.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.117©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.2.2.10 Context 
DiagramsThe context diagram is an example of a scope model. Context diagrams visually depict the product scope by 
showing a business system (process, equipment, computer system, etc.), and how people and other systems 

(actors) interact with it. Context diagrams show inputs to the business system, the actor(s) providing the input, the 

outputs from the business system, and the actor(s) receiving the output.
5.2.2.11 Document AnalysisDocument analysis is used to elicit requirements by analyzing existing documentation and identifying 
information relevant to the requirements. There are a wide range of documents that may be analyzed to help elicit 

relevant requirements. Examples of documents that may be analyzed include, but are not limited to: business plans, 

marketing literature, agreements, requests for proposal, current process ˚ows, logical data models, business rules 

repositories, application software documentation, business process or interface documentation, use cases, other 

requirements documentation, problem/issue logs, policies, procedures, and regulatory documentation such as 

laws, codes, or ordinances, etc.
5.2.3 Collect Requirements: Outputs5.2.3.1 Requirements DocumentationRequirements documentation describes how individual requirements meet the business need for the project. 
Requirements may start out at a high level and become progressively more detailed as more about the requirements 

is known. Before being baselined, requirements need to be unambiguous (measurable and testable), traceable, 

complete, consistent, and acceptable to key stakeholders. The format of a requirements document may range from 

a simple document listing all the requirements categorized by stakeholder and priority, to more elaborate forms 

containing an executive summary, detailed descriptions, and attachments.
Components of requirements documentation can include, but, are not limited to:
Business requirements, including:
 ˜Business and project objectives for traceability; ˜Business rules for the performing organization; and
 ˜Guiding principles of the organization.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.118©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTStakeholder requirements, including:
 ˜Impacts to other organizational areas;
 ˜Impacts to other entities inside or outside the performing organization; and
 ˜Stakeholder communication and reporting requirements.
Solution requirements, including:
 ˜Functional and nonfunctional requirements; ˜Technology and standard compliance requirements;
 ˜Support and training requirements; ˜Quality requirements; and ˜ Reporting requirements, etc. (solution requirements can be documented textually, in models,  
or both).Project requirements, such as:
 ˜Levels of service, performance, safety, compliance, etc.; and
 ˜Acceptance criteria.Transition requirements.
Requirements assumptions, dependencies, and constraints.
5.2.3.2 Requirements Traceability MatrixThe requirements traceability matrix is a grid that links product requirements from their origin to the 
deliverables that satisfy them. The implementation of a requirements traceability matrix helps ensure that each 

requirement adds business value by linking it to the business and project objectives. It provides a means 

to track requirements throughout the project life cycle, helping to ensure that requirements approved in the 

requirements documentation are delivered at the end of the project. Finally, it provides a structure for managing 

changes to the product scope.Tracing includes, but is not limited to, tracing requirements for the following:
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.119©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5Business needs, opportunities, goals, and objectives;
Project objectives;Project scope/WBS deliverables;Product design;Product development;Test strategy and test scenarios; and
High-level requirements to more detailed requirements.Attributes associated with each requirement can be recorded in the requirements traceability matrix. These 
attributes help to define key information about the requirement. Typical attributes used in the requirements  
traceability matrix may include: a unique identifier, a textual description of the requirement, the rationale 

for inclusion, owner, source, priority, version, current status (such as active, cancelled, deferred, added, 

approved, assigned, completed), and status date. Additional attributes to ensure that the requirement has met 

stakeholders™ satisfaction may include stability, complexity, and acceptance criteria. Figure 5-6 provides an 

example of a requirements traceability matrix with its associated attributes.
Requirements Traceability Matrix
Requirements DescriptionIDBusiness Needs,Opportunities,Goals, Objectives
ProjectObjectivesAssociateIDWBSDeliverablesProductDesignProductDevelopmentTest
CasesPrograms
Portfolios
Project Name: 
Cost Center: 
Project Description:1.0
1.1
1.21.2.12.0
2.12.1.13.0
3.1
3.2
4.0
5.0001
002
003
004
005Figure 5-6. Example of a 
Requirements Traceability MatrixLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.120©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.3 Define ScopeDe˜ne Scope is the process of developing a detailed description of the project and product. The key bene˜t of 
this process is that it describes the project, service, or result boundaries by de˜ning which of the requirements 

collected will be included in and excluded from the project scope. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of 

this process are depicted in Figure 5-7. Figure 5-8 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Scope management plan
.2 Project charter
.3 Requirements   
 documentation
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Product analysis
.3 Alternatives generation
.4 Facilitated workshops
.1 Project scope statement
.2 Project documents  
 updatesFigure 5-7. 
Define Scope: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
Outputs Project Scope Management5.3DefineScope5.1Plan ScopeManagement5.2CollectRequirements5.4CreateWBSOrganizational
ProjectcharterRequirements
ocumentation
Scopemanagement
planPscopestatementP
s4.1Develop ProjectCharter
6.3SequenceActivities6.5EstimateActivity Durations6.6DevelopScheduleProjectDocumentsEnterprise/
OrganizationFigure 5-8. 
Define Scope Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.121©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5Since all of the requirements identi˜ed in Collect Requirements may not be included in the project, the De˜ne 
Scope process selects the ˜nal project requirements from the requirements documentation delivered during the 

Collect Requirements process. It then develops a detailed description of the project and product, service, or result.
The preparation of a detailed project scope statement is critical to project success and builds upon the major 
deliverables, assumptions, and constraints that are documented during project initiation. During project planning, 

the project scope is de˜ned and described with greater speci˜city as more information about the project is known. 

Existing risks, assumptions, and constraints are analyzed for completeness and added or updated as necessary. 

The De˜ne Scope process can be highly iterative. In iterative life cycle projects, a high-level vision will be developed 

for the overall project, but the detailed scope is determined one iteration at a time and the detailed planning for the 

next iteration is carried out as work progresses on the current project scope and deliverables.
5.3.1 Define Scope: Inputs5.3.1.1 Scope Management PlanDescribed in Section 5.1.3.1.The scope management plan is a component of the project management plan  
that establishes the activities for developing, monitoring, and controlling the project scope.
5.3.1.2 Project CharterDescribed in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter provides the high-level project description and product 
characteristics. It also contains project approval requirements. If a project charter is not used in the performing 

organization, then comparable information needs to be acquired or developed, and used as a basis for the detailed 

project scope statement. Organizations that do not produce a formal project charter will usually perform an informal 

analysis to identify the content necessary for further scope planning.
5.3.1.3 Requirements DocumentationDescribed in Section 5.2.3.1. This documentation will be used to select the requirements that will be included 
in the project.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.122©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.3.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. Organizational process assets can in˚uence how scope is de˜ned. Examples include, 
but are not limited to:Policies, procedures, and templates for a project scope statement;
Project ˜les from previous projects; andLessons learned from previous phases or projects.5.3.2 Define Scope: Tools and Techniques5.3.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment is often used to analyze the information needed to develop the project scope statement. Such 
judgment and expertise is applied to any technical detail. Such expertise is provided by any group or individual with 

specialized knowledge or training, and is available from many sources, including but not limited to:
Other units within the organization;
Consultants;Stakeholders, including customers or sponsors;
Professional and technical associations;
Industry groups; and
Subject matter experts.
5.3.2.2 Product AnalysisFor projects that have a product as a deliverable, as opposed to a service or result, product analysis can be an 
effective tool. Each application area has one or more generally accepted methods for translating high-level product 

descriptions into tangible deliverables. Product analysis includes techniques such as product breakdown, systems 

analysis, requirements analysis, systems engineering, value engineering, and value analysis.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.123©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.3.2.3 Alternatives GenerationAlternatives generation is a technique used to develop as many potential options as possible in order to identify 
different approaches to execute and perform the work of the project. A variety of general management techniques 

can be used, such as brainstorming, lateral thinking, analysis of alternatives, etc.
5.3.2.4 Facilitated Workshops
Described in Section 5.2.2.3. The participation of key players with a variety of expectations and/or ˜elds of 
expertise in these intensive working sessions helps to reach a cross-functional and common understanding of the 
project objectives and its limits.5.3.3 Define Scope: Outputs5.3.3.1 Project Scope StatementThe project scope statement is the description of the project scope, major deliverables, assumptions, and 
constraints. The project scope statement documents the entire scope, including project and product scope. It 

describes, in detail, the project™s deliverables and the work required to create those deliverables. It also provides a 

common understanding of the project scope among project stakeholders. It may contain explicit scope exclusions 

that can assist in managing stakeholder expectations. It enables the project team to perform more detailed planning, 

guides the project team™s work during execution, and provides the baseline for evaluating whether requests for 

changes or additional work are contained within or outside the project™s boundaries.
The degree and level of detail to which the project scope statement de˜nes the work that will be performed 
and the work that is excluded can help determine how well the project management team can control the overall 

project scope. The detailed project scope statement, either directly, or by reference to other documents, includes 

the following:
 Product scope description. Progressively elaborates the characteristics of the product, service, or result 

described in the project charter and requirements documentation.
Acceptance criteria. A set of conditions that is required to be met before deliverables are accepted.
 Deliverable. Any unique and veri˜able product, result, or capability to perform a service that is required 
to be produced to complete a process, phase, or project. Deliverables also include ancillary results, such 

as project management reports and documentation. These deliverables may be described at a summary 

level or in great detail.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.124©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT Project exclusion.
 Generally identi˜es what is excluded from the project. Explicitly stating what is out of 
scope for the project helps to manage stakeholders™ expectations.
 Constraints. A limiting factor that affects the execution of a project or process. Constraints identi˜ed with 
the project scope statement list and describe the speci˜c internal or external restrictions or limitations 

associated with the project scope that affect the execution of the project, for example, a prede˜ned 

budget or any imposed dates or schedule milestones that are issued by the customer or performing 

organization. When a project is performed under an agreement, contractual provisions will generally be 

constraints. Information on constraints may be listed in the project scope statement or in a separate log.
 Assumptions. A factor in the planning process that is considered to be true, real, or certain, without 

proof or demonstration. Also describes the potential impact of those factors if they prove to be false. 

Project teams frequently identify, document, and validate assumptions as part of their planning process. 

Information on assumptions may be listed in the project scope statement or in a separate log.
Although the project charter and the project scope statement are sometimes perceived as containing a certain 
degree of redundancy, they are different in the level of detail contained in each. The project charter contains high-

level information, while the project scope statement contains a detailed description of the scope elements. These 

elements are progressively elaborated throughout the project. Table 5-1 describes some of the key elements for 

each document.Table 5-1. Elements of the Project 
Charter and Project Scope StatementProject Charter
Project purpose or justification
Measurable project objectives 
and related success criteria
High-level requirements
High-level project description
High-level risks
Summary milestone schedule

Summary budget

Stakeholder list
Project approval requirements 
(what constitutes success, who 

decides it, who signs off)
Assigned project manager, 

responsibility, and authority 

level
Name and authority of the 
sponsor or other person(s) 
authorizing the project charterProject  Scope Statement
Project scope description 
(progressively elaborated)
Acceptance criteria
Project deliverables
Project exclusions

Project constraints
Project assumptionsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.125©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5 5.3.3.2 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Stakeholder register,
Requirements documentation, and
Requirements traceability matrix.
5.4 Create WBSCreate WBS is the process of subdividing project deliverables and project work into smaller, more manageable 
components. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides a structured vision of what has to be delivered. The 

inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 5-9. Figure 5-10 depicts the data 

˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Scope management plan
.2 Project scope statement
.3 Requirements   
 documentation
.4 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.5 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Decomposition
.2 Expert judgment 
.1 Scope baseline
.2 Project documents  
 updatesFigure 5-9. 
Create WBS: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.126©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT Project Scope Management5.4CreateWBS5.3DefineScope5.1Plan ScopeManagement5.2CollectRequirements5.5Validate
ScopeEnterprisenvironmentalfactorsOrganizational
PstatementRequirements
ocumentation
Scopemanagement
planScopeaselineP
s7.2EstimateCosts7.3Determine
Budget4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan6.2DefineActivities11.2IdentifyRisks11.3 Perform
Qualitative RiskAnalysisProjectDocumentsEnterprise/
OrganizationFigure 5-10. 
Create WBS Data Flow DiagramThe WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project team to 
accomplish the project objectives and create the required deliverables. The WBS organizes and de˜nes the total 

scope of the project, and represents the work speci˜ed in the current approved project scope statement.
The planned work is contained within the lowest level of WBS components, which are called work packages. 
A work package can be used to group the activities where work is scheduled and estimated, monitored, and 

controlled. In the context of the WBS, work refers to work products or deliverables that are the result of activity and 

not to the activity itself.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.127©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.4.1 Create WBS: Inputs5.4.1.1 Scope Management PlanDescribed in Section 5.1.3.1. The scope management plan speci˜es how to create the WBS from the detailed 
project scope statement and how the WBS will be maintained and approved.
5.4.1.2 Project Scope StatementDescribed in Section 5.3.3.1. The project scope statement describes the work that will be performed and the 
work that is excluded. It also lists and describes the speci˜c internal or external restrictions or limitations that may 

affect the execution of the project.5.4.1.3 Requirements DocumentationDescribed in Section 5.2.3.1. Detailed requirements documentation is essential for understanding what needs 
to be produced as the result of the project and what needs to be done to deliver the project and its ˜nal products.
5.4.1.4 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. Industry-speci˜c WBS standards, relevant to the nature of the project, may serve 
as external reference sources for creation of the WBS. For example, engineering projects may reference ISO/IEC 

15288 on Systems Engineering Œ System Life Cycle Processes [6], to create a WBS for a new project.
5.4.1.5 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Create WBS process 
include, but are not limited to:
Policies, procedures, and templates for the WBS;
Project ˜les from previous projects; andLessons learned from previous projects.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.128©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.4.2 Create WBS: Tools and Techniques5.4.2.1 DecompositionDecomposition is a technique used for dividing and subdividing the project scope and project deliverables into smaller, more manageable parts. The work package is the work de˜ned at the lowest level of the WBS for which 

cost and duration can be estimated and managed. The level of decomposition is often guided by the degree of 

control needed to effectively manage the project. The level of detail for work packages will vary with the size 

and complexity of the project. Decomposition of the total project work into work packages generally involves the 

following activities:
Identifying and analyzing the deliverables and related work;
Structuring and organizing the WBS;
Decomposing the upper WBS levels into lower-level detailed components;
Developing and assigning identi˜cation codes to the WBS components; and
Verifying that the degree of decomposition of the deliverables is appropriate.
A portion of a WBS with some branches of the WBS decomposed down through the work package level is shown 
in Figure 5-11.
5.4.2.2 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment is often used to analyze the information needed to decompose the project deliverables down 
into smaller component parts in order to create an effective WBS. Such judgment and expertise is applied to 

technical details of the project™s scope and used to reconcile differences in opinion on how to best break down 

the overall scope of the project. This level of expertise is provided by any group or individual with relevant training, 

knowledge, or experience with similar projects or business areas. Expert judgment can also come in the form 

of prede˜ned templates that provide guidance on how to effectively break down common deliverables. Such 

templates may be industry or discipline speci˜c or may come from experience gained in similar projects. The 

project manager, in collaboration with the project team, then determines the ˜nal decomposition of the project 

scope into the discrete work packages that will be used to effectively manage the work of the project.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.129©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT51.0Value Management
System Project1.1NeedsAssessment1.2StandardsDevelopment1.3SystemsEngineering 1.4ProjectManagementThe WBS is illustrative only. It is not intended to represent the full project scope of any specific project, 
nor to imply that this is the only way to organize a WBS on this type of project.
1.1.1.1ComponentsIdentification1.1.2.1GapAssessment1.1.3.1Alternatives
Identification1.1.4System RequirementsDevelopment1.1.3Alternatives
Development1.1.2RequirementsDetermination
1.1.1Current System
Audit1.1.1.2ComponentsAnalysis1.1.2.2RequirementsChanges Identification1.1.3.2Alternatives
AnalysisFigure 5-11. Sample WBS 
Decomposed Down Through Work Packages
A WBS structure may be created through various approaches. Some of the popular methods include the top-
down approach, the use of organization-speci˜c guidelines, and the use of WBS templates. A bottom-up approach 

can be used during the integration of subcomponents. The WBS structure can be represented in a number of forms, 

such as: Using phases of the project life cycle as the second level of decomposition, with the product and project 

deliverables inserted at the third level, as shown in Figure 5-12;
Using major deliverables as the second level of decomposition, as shown in Figure 5-13; and
 Incorporating subcomponents which may be developed by organizations outside the project team, such 

as contracted work. The seller then develops the supporting contract WBS as part of the contracted work.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.130©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTPlanningSoftware Product 
Release 5.0Detail DesignConstruct
Integration and Test
Project ManagementProduct RequirementsSoftware
Software
Software
Software
MeetingsUser Documentation User Documentation User Documentation User Documentation AdministrationTraining Program 
MaterialsTraining Program 
MaterialsTraining Program 
MaterialsTraining Program 
MaterialsThe WBS is illustrative only. It is not intended to represent the full project scope of any specific project, 
nor to imply that this is the only way to organize a WBS on this type of project.
Figure 5-12. Sample WBS 
Organized by PhaseSystem Engineering Management Supporting 
PM Activities Aircraft System Project ManagementEquipment Training
Facilities 
Training 
Services 
Training 
Training
Technical 
Orders 
Engineering Data Management Data DataAir Vehicle
Organizational Level SE Intermediate 
Level SE Depot Level SE Support 
EquipmentAirframeEngineCommunication System Navigation 
System Fire Control 
System Base Buildings Maintenance Facility 
Facilities
Mock-upsOperational Test
Developmental Test
Test
Test and 
EvaluationThe WBS is illustrative only. It is not intended to represent the full project scope of any specific project, 
nor to imply that this is the only way to organize a WBS on this type of project.
Figure 5-13. Sample WBS with Major 
DeliverablesLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.131©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5Decomposition of the upper-level WBS components requires subdividing the work for each of the deliverables 
or subcomponents into its most fundamental elements, where the WBS components represent veri˜able products, 

services, or results. The WBS may be structured as an outline, an organizational chart, or other method that identi˜es 

a hierarchical breakdown. Verifying the correctness of the decomposition requires determining that the lower-level 

WBS components are those that are necessary and suf˜cient for completion of the corresponding higher-level 

deliverables. Different deliverables can have different levels of decomposition. To arrive at a work package, the 

work for some deliverables needs to be decomposed only to the next level, while others need additional levels of 

decomposition. As the work is decomposed to greater levels of detail, the ability to plan, manage, and control the 

work is enhanced. However, excessive decomposition can lead to nonproductive management effort, inef˜cient 

use of resources, decreased ef˜ciency in performing the work, and dif˜culty aggregating data over different levels 

of the WBS.
Decomposition may not be possible for a deliverable or subcomponent that will be accomplished far into the 
future. The project management team usually waits until the deliverable or subcomponent is agreed on, so the 

details of the WBS can be developed. This technique is sometimes referred to as rolling wave planning.
The WBS represents all product and project work, including the project management work. The total of the work 
at the lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no extra work is performed. 

This is sometimes called the 100 percent rule.For speci˜c information regarding the WBS, refer to the 
Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures
 Œ Second Edition [7]. This standard contains industry-speci˜c examples of WBS templates that can be tailored to 

speci˜c projects in a particular application area.
5.4.3 Create WBS: Outputs5.4.3.1 Scope BaselineThe scope baseline is the approved version of a scope statement, work breakdown structure (WBS), and its 
associated WBS dictionary, that can be changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a 

basis for comparison. It is a component of the project management plan. Components of the scope baseline include:
 Project scope statement. 
The project scope statement includes the description of the project scope, 

major deliverables, assumptions, and constraints.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.132©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT WBS. 
The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project 
team to accomplish the project objectives and create the required deliverables. Each descending level 

of the WBS represents an increasingly detailed de˜nition of the project work. The WBS is ˜nalized by 

assigning each work package to a control account and establishing a unique identi˜er for that work 

package from a code of accounts. These identi˜ers provide a structure for hierarchical summation 

of costs, schedule, and resource information. A control account is a management control point 

where scope, budget, actual cost, and schedule are integrated and compared to the earned value for 

performance measurement. Control accounts are placed at selected management points in the WBS. 

Each control account may include one or more work packages, but each of the work packages should 

be associated with only one control account. A control account may include one or more planning 

packages. A planning package is a work breakdown structure component below the control account 

with known work content but without detailed schedule activities.
 WBS dictionary. 
The WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed deliverable, activity, and 
scheduling information about each component in the WBS. The WBS dictionary is a document that 

supports the WBS. Information in the WBS dictionary may include, but is not limited to:
 ˜Code of account identifier,
 ˜Description of work, ˜Assumptions and constraints, ˜Responsible organization,
 ˜Schedule milestones, ˜Associated schedule activities,
 ˜Resources required, ˜Cost estimates,
 ˜Quality requirements, ˜Acceptance criteria, ˜Technical references, and
 ˜Agreement information.
5.4.3.2 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to, requirements documentation, which may 
need to be updated to include approved changes. If approved change requests result from the Create WBS process, 

then the requirements documentation may need to be updated to include approved changes.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.133©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.5 Validate Scope
Validate Scope is the process of formalizing acceptance of the completed project deliverables. The key bene˜t 
of this process is that it brings objectivity to the acceptance process and increases the chance of ˜nal product, 

service, or result acceptance by validating each deliverable. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this 

process are depicted in Figure 5-14. Figure 5-15 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Requirements   
 documentation
.3 Requirements traceability  
 matrix
.4 Verified deliverables
.5 Work performance data
.1 Inspection
.2 Group decision-making  
 techniques
.1 Accepted deliverables
.2 Change requests
.3 Work performance  
 information
.4 Project documents  
 updatesFigure 5-14. Validate Scope: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
Outputs Project Scope Management5.5Validate
Scope5.2CollectRequirements
Projectcharter
Requirements
ocumentation

Requirements


C
Aeliverables
P
s
W

W

Va
eliverables
plan8.3ControlQuality4.3Direct andManageProject Work
4.4Monitor andControl ProjectWork
4.5Perform
IntegratedChange Control4.6 Close Projector PhaseProjectDocuments4.2Develop Project ManagementPlanFigure 5-15. Validate Scope 
Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.134©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENTThe veri˜ed deliverables obtained from the Control Quality process are reviewed with the customer or sponsor 
to ensure that they are completed satisfactorily and have received formal acceptance of the deliverables by the 

customer or sponsor. In this process, the outputs obtained as a result of the Planning processes in the Project Scope 

Management Knowledge Area, such as the requirements documentation or the scope baseline, as well as the work 

performance data obtained from the Execution processes in other Knowledge Areas, are the basis for performing 

the validation and for ˜nal acceptance.
The Validate Scope process differs from the Control Quality process in that the former is primarily concerned 
with acceptance of the deliverables, while quality control is primarily concerned with correctness of the deliverables 

and meeting the quality requirements speci˜ed for the deliverables. Control Quality is generally performed before 

Validate Scope, although the two processes may be performed in parallel.
5.5.1 Validate Scope: Inputs
5.5.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan contains the scope management plan and the 
scope baseline. As described in Section 5.1.3.1, the scope management plan speci˜es how formal acceptance of 

the completed project deliverables will be obtained. The scope baseline (Section 5.4.3.1) includes the approved 

version of a scope statement, work breakdown structure (WBS), and its associated WBS dictionary, that can be 

changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison.5.5.1.2 Requirements DocumentationDescribed in Section 5.2.3.1. The requirements documentation lists all the project, product, and other types of 
requirements for the project and product, along with their acceptance criteria.
5.5.1.3 Requirements Traceability MatrixDescribed in Section 5.2.3.2. The requirements traceability matrix links requirements to their origin and tracks 
them throughout the project life cycle.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.135©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.5.1.4 Verified 
DeliverablesDescribed in Section 8.3.3.3. Veri˜ed deliverables are project deliverables that are completed and checked for 
correctness through the Control Quality process.5.5.1.5 Work Performance 
DataDescribed in Section 4.3.3.2. Work performance data can include the degree of compliance with requirements, 
number of nonconformities, severity of the nonconformities, or the number of validation cycles performed in a 

period of time.5.5.2 Validate Scope: 
Tools and Techniques5.5.2.1 InspectionInspection includes activities such as measuring, examining, and validating to determine whether work and 
deliverables meet requirements and product acceptance criteria. Inspections are sometimes called reviews, 

product reviews, audits, and walkthroughs. In some application areas, these different terms have unique and 

speci˜c meanings.5.5.2.2 Group Decision-Making TechniquesDescribed in Section 5.2.2.5. These techniques are used to reach a conclusion when the validation is performed 
by the project team and other stakeholders.5.5.3 Validate Scope: 
Outputs5.5.3.1 Accepted DeliverablesDeliverables that meet the acceptance criteria are formally signed off and approved by the customer or sponsor. 
Formal documentation received from the customer or sponsor acknowledging formal stakeholder acceptance of 

the project™s deliverables is forwarded to the Close Project or Phase process (Section 4.6).
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.136©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.5.3.2 Change RequestsThe completed deliverables that have not been formally accepted are documented, along with the reasons 
for nonacceptance of those deliverables. Those deliverables may require a change request for defect repair. The 

change requests are processed for review and disposition through the Perform Integrated Change Control process 

(Section 4.5).5.5.3.3 Work Performance Information
Work performance information includes information about project progress, such as which deliverables 
have started, their progress, which deliverables have ˜nished, or which have been accepted. This information is 

documented as described in Section 10.3.3.1 and communicated to stakeholders.
5.5.3.4 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated as a result of the Validate Scope process include any documents that 
de˜ne the product or report status on product completion. Veri˜ed project documents may require approvals from 

the customer or sponsor in the form of signatures or signoffs.
5.6 Control ScopeControl Scope is the process of monitoring the status of the project and product scope and managing changes to 
the scope baseline. The key bene˜t of this process is that it allows the scope baseline to be maintained throughout 

the project. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 5-16. Figure 5-17 

depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Requirements   
 documentation
.3 Requirements traceability  
 matrix
.4 Work performance data
.5 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Variance analysis
.1 Work performance  
 information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan  
 updates
.4 Project documents  

 updates
.5 Organizational process  

 assets updates
Figure 5-16. 
Control Scope: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.137©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5 Project Scope Management5.6ControlScope5.2CollectRequirementsProjectcharterRequirements
ocumentation
Requirements

WnO
sCsP
sP
Project
W
Organizational
4.3Direct and Manage ProjectWork
4.2Develop Project ManagementPlan4.2Develop Project ManagementPlan4.4Monitor andControl ProjectWork
4.5Perform
IntegratedChange ControlProjectDocumentsEnterprise/
OrganizationEnterprise/
OrganizationFigure 5-17. 
Control Scope Data Flow DiagramControlling the project scope ensures all requested changes and recommended corrective or preventive actions 
are processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (see Section 4.5). Control Scope is also used 

to manage the actual changes when they occur and is integrated with the other control processes. The uncontrolled 

expansion to product or project scope without adjustments to time, cost, and resources is referred to as scope 

creep. Change is inevitable; therefore some type of change control process is mandatory for every project.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.138©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.6.1 Control Scope: Inputs5.6.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The following information from the project management plan is used to control 
scope: Scope baseline. 
The scope baseline is compared to actual results to determine if a change, corrective 

action, or preventive action is necessary.
 Scope management plan. 
Sections from the scope management plan describe how the project scope 

will be monitored and controlled. C
hange management plan. The change management plan de˜nes the process for managing change 
on the project. C
onfiguration management plan. 
The con˜guration management plan de˜nes those items that are 
con˜gurable, those items that require formal change control, and the process for controlling changes to 

such items. Requirements management plan. This plan is a component of the project management plan and 
describes how the project requirements will be analyzed, documented, and managed.
5.6.1.2 Requirements DocumentationDescribed in Section 5.2.3.1. Requirements should be unambiguous (measurable and testable), traceable, 
complete, consistent, and acceptable to key stakeholders. Well-documented requirements make it easier to detect 

any deviation in the scope agreed for the project or product.
5.6.1.3 Requirements Traceability MatrixDescribed in Section 5.2.3.2. The requirements traceability matrix helps to detect the impact of any change or 
deviation from the scope baseline on the project objectives.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.139©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT55.6.1.4 Work Performance 
DataDescribed in Section 4.3.3.2. Work performance data can include the number of change requests received, the 
number of requests accepted or the number of deliverables completed, etc.
5.6.1.5 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Control Scope process 
include, but are not limited to:
Existing formal and informal scope, control-related policies, procedures, guidelines; and
Monitoring and reporting methods and templates to be used.
5.6.2 Control Scope: Tools and Techniques5.6.2.1 Variance Analysis
Variance analysis is a technique for determining the cause and degree of difference between the baseline and 
actual performance. Project performance measurements are used to assess the magnitude of variation from the 

original scope baseline. Important aspects of project scope control include determining the cause and degree of 

variance relative to the scope baseline (Section 5.4.3.1) and deciding whether corrective or preventive action is 

required.5.6.3 Control Scope: Outputs5.6.3.1 Work Performance Information
Work performance information produced includes correlated and contextualized information on how the project 
scope is performing compared to the scope baseline. It can include the categories of the changes received, the 

identi˜ed scope variances and their causes, how they impact schedule or cost, and the forecast of the future scope 

performance. This information provides a foundation for making scope decisions.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.140©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
5 - PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT5.6.3.2 Change RequestsAnalysis of scope performance can result in a change request to the scope baseline or other components of the project management plan. Change requests can include preventive or corrective actions, defect repairs, 

or enhancement requests. Change requests are processed for review and disposition according to the Perform 

Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5).
5.6.3.3 Project Management Plan UpdatesProject management plan updates may include, but are not limited to:
 Scope Baseline Updates. 
If the approved change requests have an effect on the project scope, then 
the scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary are revised and reissued to re˚ect the approved 

changes through Perform Integrated Change Control process.
 O
ther Baseline Updates. If the approved change requests have an effect on the project besides the 
project scope, then the corresponding cost baseline and schedule baselines are revised and reissued to 

re˚ect the approved changes.
5.6.3.4 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Requirements documentation, and
Requirements traceability matrix.
5.6.3.5 Organizational Process Assets UpdatesOrganizational process assets that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Causes of variances,Corrective action chosen and the reasons, and
Other types of lessons learned from project scope control.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.141©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6PROJECT TIME MA
NAGEMENTProject Time Management includes the processes required to manage the timely completion of the project.

Figure 6-1 provides an overview of the Project Time Management processes, which are as follows:
6.1  Plan Schedule ManagementŠThe process of establishing the policies, procedures, and documentation 

for planning, developing, managing, executing, and controlling the project schedule.
6.2  Define Activities
ŠThe process of identifying and documenting the speci˜c actions to be performed to produce the project deliverables.6.3  Sequence Activities
ŠThe process of identifying and documenting relationships among the project 

activities.6.4  Estimate Activity ResourcesŠThe process of estimating the type and quantities of material, human 
resources, equipment, or supplies required to perform each activity.
6.5  Estimate Activity DurationsŠThe process of estimating the number of work periods needed to 
complete individual activities with estimated resources.
6.6  Develop Schedule
ŠThe process of analyzing activity sequences, durations, resource requirements, 
and schedule constraints to create the project schedule model.
6.7  Control Schedule
ŠThe process of monitoring the status of project activities to update project 
progress and manage changes to the schedule baseline to achieve the plan.
66Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.142©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTThese processes interact with each other and with processes in other Knowledge Areas as described in detail 
in Section 3 and Annex A1.
Distinguishing the project schedule presentation (schedule) from the schedule data (Section 6.6.3.3) and 
calculations that produce the project schedule (Section 6.6.3.2) is practiced by referring to the scheduling tool 

populated with project data as the schedule model. A schedule model is a representation of the plan for executing 

the project™s activities including durations, dependencies, and other planning information, used to produce project 

schedules along with other scheduling artifacts. For speci˜c information regarding the schedule model, refer to the 

Practice Standard for Scheduling. [8]
On some projects, especially those of smaller scope, de˜ning activities, sequencing activities, estimating 
activity resources, estimating activity durations, and developing the schedule model are so tightly linked that they 

are viewed as a single process that can be performed by a person over a relatively short period of time. These 

processes are presented here as distinct elements because the tools and techniques for each process are different.The Project Time Management processes and their associated tools and techniques are documented in the 
schedule management plan. The schedule management plan is a subsidiary plan of, and integrated with, the project 

management plan through the Develop Project Management Plan process (Section 4.2), The schedule management 

plan identi˜es a scheduling method and scheduling tool (Figure 6-2), and sets the format and establishes criteria 

for developing and controlling the project schedule. The selected scheduling method de˜nes the framework and 

algorithms used in the scheduling tool to create the schedule model. Some of the better known scheduling methods 

include critical path method (CPM) and critical chain method (CCM).
Project schedule development uses the outputs from the processes to de˜ne activities, sequence activities, 
estimate activity resources, and estimate activity durations in combination with the scheduling tool to produce 

the schedule model. The ˜nalized and approved schedule is the baseline that will be used in the Control Schedule 

process (Section 6.7). As the project activities are being performed, the majority of effort in the Project Time 

Management Knowledge Area will occur in the Control Schedule process to ensure completion of project work in a 

timely manner. Figure 6-2 provides a scheduling overview that shows how the scheduling method, scheduling tool, 

and outputs from the Project Time Management processes interact to create a project schedule.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.143©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.1 Inputs
 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Project charter
 .3 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
 .4 Organizational process   
  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Analytical techniques
 .3 Meetings
.3 Outputs
 .1 Schedule management   
  plan
Project TimeManagement Overview6.1 Plan ScheduleManagement.1 Inputs
 .1 Schedule management   
  plan
 .2 Scope baseline
 .3 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
 .4 Organizational process   
  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Decomposition
 .2 Rolling wave planning
 .3 Expert judgment
.3 Outputs
 .1 Activity list
 .2 Activity attributes
 .3 Milestone list
6.2 Define Activities.1 Inputs
 .1 Schedule management   
  plan
 .2 Activity list
 .3 Activity attributes
 .4 Milestone list
 .5 Project scope statement
 .6 Enterprise environmental           
  factors
 .7 Organizational process   
  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Precedence diagramming  
  method (PDM)
 .2 Dependency determination
 .3 Leads and lags
  
.3 Outputs
 .1 Project schedule network
  diagrams
 .2 Project documents updates
6.3 Sequence
Activities.1 Inputs
 .1 Schedule management   
  plan
 .2 Activity list
 .3 Activity attributes
 .4 Activity resource   
  requirements
 .5 Resource calendars
 .6 Project scope statement
 .7 Risk register
 .8 Resource breakdown   
  structure
 .9 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
   .10 Organizational process   
  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Analogous estimating
 .3 Parametric estimating
 .4 Three-point estimating
 .5 Group decision-making 
         techniques
 .6 Reserve analysis
.3 Outputs

 .1 Activity duration estimates
 .2 Project documents updates
6.5 Estimate ActivityDurations.1 Inputs

 .1 Schedule management   

  plan

 .2 Activity list
 .3 Activity attributes

 .4 Project schedule network  

  diagrams

 .5 Activity resource   
  requirements

 .6 Resource calendars

 .7 Activity duration estimates
 .8 Project scope statement

 .9 Risk register

   .10 Project staff assignments
   .11 Resource breakdown   

  structure

  .12 Enterprise environmental  

  factors
  .13 Organizational process   

  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Schedule network analysis
 .2 Critical path method

 .3 Critical chain method

 .4 Resource optimization   
  techniques

 .5 Modeling techniques

 .6 Leads and lags

 .7 Schedule compression
 .8 Scheduling tool
.3 Outputs

 .1 Schedule baseline

 .2 Project schedule
 .3 Schedule data

 .4 Project calendars

 .5 Project management plan  
  updates

 .6 Project documents updates
6.6 Develop Schedule.1 Inputs

 .1 Project management plan

 .2 Project schedule

 .3 Work performance data
 .4 Project calendars

 .5 Schedule data

 .6 Organizational process   

  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Performance reviews
 .2 Project management   

  software

 .3 Resource optimization   
  techniques

 .4 Modeling techniques

 .5 Leads and lags
 .6 Schedule compression

 .7 Scheduling tool
.3 Outputs
 .1 Work performance   

  information

 .2 Schedule forecasts

 .3 Change requests

 .4 Project management plan  

  updates

 .5 Project documents updates

 .6 Organizational process   

  assets updates
6.7 Control Schedule.1 Inputs

 .1 Schedule management   

  plan

 .2 Activity list

 .3 Activity attributes

 .4 Resource calendars

 .5 Risk register

 .6 Activity cost estimates

 .7 Enterprise environmental  
  factors

 .8 Organizational process   

  assets
.2 Tools & Techniques
 .1 Expert judgment

 .2 Alternative analysis

 .3 Published estimating data

 .4 Bottom-up estimating

 .5 Project management   

  software
.3 Outputs

 .1 Activity resource
  requirements

 .2 Resource breakdown   
  structure

 .3 Project documents   

  updates
6.4 Estimate ActivityResourcesFigure 6-1. Project 
Time Management Overview
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.144©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTExamples of Project Schedule PresentationsNetwork Diagram
Bar Chart
Activity ListProjectScheduleScheduleModelProjectInformation
SchedulingMethodSchedulingTool
OutputGeneratesProject Specific Data(e.g., WBS, activities,
resources, durations, 
dependencies, constraints,
calendars, milestones
lags, etc.)
For example,
CPMFigure 6-2. Scheduling 
Overview
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.145©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6 6.1 Plan Schedule ManagementPlan Schedule Management is the process of establishing the policies, procedures, and documentation for 
planning, developing, managing, executing, and controlling the project schedule. The key bene˜t of this process is 

that it provides guidance and direction on how the project schedule will be managed throughout the project. The 

inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-3. Figure 6-4 depicts the data 

˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Project charter
.3 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Analytical techniques
.3 Meetings
.1 Schedule management  
 planFigure 6-3. Plan Schedule Management: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
Outputs CgProject Time Management
6.1Plan ScheduleManagement6.2DefineActivities6.4Estimate ActivityResources6.3SequenceActivities6.5Estimate ActivityDurations6.6DevelopSchedule






O




4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan11.2IdentifyRisks11.4Perform
QuantitativeRisk Analysis4.1 Develop ProjectCharter
Enterprise/
OrganizationFigure 6-4. Plan Schedule Management 
Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.146©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTThe schedule management plan is a component of the project management plan. The schedule management 
plan may be formal or informal, highly detailed or broadly framed, based upon the needs of the project, and 

includes appropriate control thresholds. The schedule management plan de˜nes how schedule contingencies will 

be reported and assessed. The schedule management plan may be updated to re˚ect a change in the way the 

schedule is managed. The schedule management plan is a major input into the Develop Project Management Plan 

process, as referenced in Section 6.1.3.1.
6.1.1 Plan Schedule Management: Inputs6.1.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan contains information used to develop the schedule 
management plan which includes, but is not limited to:
 Scope baseline. The scope baseline includes the project scope statement and the work breakdown 

structure (WBS) details used for de˜ning activities, duration estimation, and schedule management; and
 Other information.
 Other scheduling related cost, risk, and communications decisions from the project 
management plan are used to develop the schedule.
6.1.1.2 Project CharterDescribed in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter de˜nes the summary milestone schedule and project approval 
requirements that will in˚uence the management of the project schedule.
6.1.1.3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that in˚uence the Plan Schedule Management 
process include, but are not limited to:
Organizational culture and structure can all in˚uence schedule management;
Resource availability and skills that may in˚uence schedule planning;
 Project management software provides the scheduling tool and alternative possibilities for managing the 

schedule; Published commercial information, such as resource productivity information, is often available from 

commercial databases that track; and
Organizational work authorization systems.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.147©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.1.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that in˚uence the Plan Schedule Management 
process include, but are not limited to:
Monitoring and reporting tools to be used;Historical information;
Schedule control tools;Existing formal and informal schedule control related policies, procedures, and guidelines;
Templates;
Project closure guidelines;
Change control procedures; and Risk control procedures including risk categories, probability de˜nition and impact, and probability and 

impact matrix.
6.1.2 Plan Schedule Management: Tools and Techniques6.1.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment, guided by historical information, provides valuable insight about the environment and 
information from prior similar projects. Expert judgment can also suggest whether to combine methods and how to 

reconcile differences between them.Judgment based upon expertise in an application area, Knowledge Area, discipline, industry, etc., as appropriate 
for the activity being performed, should be used in developing the schedule management plan.
6.1.2.2 Analytical TechniquesThe Plan Schedule Management process may involve choosing strategic options to estimate and schedule the 
project such as: scheduling methodology, scheduling tools and techniques, estimating approaches, formats, and 

project management software. The schedule management plan may also detail ways to fast track or crash (Section 

6.6.2.7) the project schedule such as undertaking work in parallel. These decisions, like other schedule decisions 

affecting the project, may affect project risks.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.148©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTOrganizational policies and procedures may in˚uence which scheduling techniques are employed in these 
decisions. Techniques may include, but are not limited to, rolling wave planning (Section 6.2.2.2), leads and lags 

(Section 6.3.2.3), alternatives analysis (Section 6.4.2.2), and methods for reviewing schedule performance (Section 

6.7.2.1).6.1.2.3 MeetingsProject teams may hold planning meetings to develop the schedule management plan. Participants at these 
meetings may include the project manager, the project sponsor, selected project team members, selected 

stakeholders, anyone with responsibility for schedule planning or execution, and others as needed.
6.1.3 Plan Schedule Management: Outputs6.1.3.1 Schedule Management PlanA component of the project management plan that establishes the criteria and the activities for developing, 
monitoring, and controlling the schedule. The schedule management plan may be formal or informal, highly detailed 

or broadly framed, based upon the needs of the project, and includes appropriate control thresholds.
For example, the schedule management plan can establish the following:
 Project schedule model development. 
The scheduling methodology and the scheduling tool to be used 

in the development of the project schedule model are speci˜ed. Level of accuracy. 
The acceptable range used in determining realistic activity duration estimates is 

speci˜ed and may include an amount for contingencies.
 U
nits of measure. Each unit used in measurements (such as staff hours, staff days, or weeks for time 
measures, or meters, liters, tons, kilometers, or cubic yards for quantity measures) is de˜ned for each of 

the resources. Organizational procedures links. The WBS (Section 5.4) provides the framework for the schedule 
management plan, allowing for consistency with the estimates and resulting schedules.
 Project schedule model maintenance.
 The process used to update the status and record progress of 

the project in the schedule model during the execution of the project is de˜ned. Control thresholds.
 Variance thresholds for monitoring schedule performance may be speci˜ed to indicate 
an agreed-upon amount of variation to be allowed before some action needs to be taken. Thresholds are 

typically expressed as percentage deviations from the parameters established in the baseline plan.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.149©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6 Rules of performance measurement. Earned value management (EVM) rules or other physical 
measurement rules of performance measurement are set. For example, the schedule management plan 

may specify: ˜Rules for establishing percent complete, ˜Control accounts at which management of progress and schedule will be measured,
 ˜ Earned value measurement techniques (e.g., baselines, fixed-formula, percent complete, etc.) 

to be employed (for more specific information, refer to the 
Practice Standard for Earned Value 
Management
) [9], 
 ˜ Schedule performance measurements such as schedule variance (SV) and schedule performance 
index (SPI) used to assess the magnitude of variation to the original schedule baseline.
Reporting formats. The formats and frequency for the various schedule reports are de˜ned.
Process descriptions. Descriptions of each of the schedule management processes are documented.
6.2 Define ActivitiesDe˜ne Activities is the process of identifying and documenting the speci˜c actions to be performed to produce 
the project deliverables. The key bene˜t of this process is to break down work packages into activities that provide 

a basis for estimating, scheduling, executing, monitoring, and controlling the project work. The inputs, tools and 

techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-5. Figure 6-6 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the 

process.Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Schedule management  
 plan
.2 Scope baseline
.3 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Decomposition
.2 Rolling wave planning
.3 Expert judgment
.1 Activity list
.2 Activity attributes
.3 Milestone list
Figure 6-5. 
Define Activities: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.150©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT CgProject Time Management
6.2Define Activities6.1Plan ScheduleManagement6.3SequenceActivities6.5Estimate ActivityDurations6.4Estimate ActivityResources6.6DevelopSchedule
eM









AA5.4CreateWBSEnterprise/
OrganizationFigure 6-6. 
Define Activities Data Flow DiagramImplicit in this process are de˜ning and planning the schedule activities such that the project objectives will 
be met. The Create WBS process identi˜es the deliverables at the lowest level in the WBSŠthe work package. 

Work packages are typically decomposed into smaller components called activities that represent the work effort 

required to complete the work package.
6.2.1 Define Activities: Inputs6.2.1.1 Schedule Management PlanDescribed in Section 6.1.3.1. A key input from the schedule management plan is the prescribed level of detail 
necessary to manage the work.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.151©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.2.1.2 Scope BaselineDescribed in Section 5.4.3.1. The project WBS, deliverables, constraints, and assumptions documented in the 
scope baseline are considered explicitly while de˜ning activities.6.2.1.3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. Enterprise environmental factors that in˚uence the De˜ne Activities process include, 
but are not limited to:Organizational cultures and structure,
Published commercial information from commercial databases, and
Project management information system (PMIS).
6.2.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the De˜ne Activities process 
include, but are not limited to:
 Lessons learned knowledge base containing historical information regarding activity lists used by previous 

similar projects,Standardized processes,Templates that contain a standard activity list or a portion of an activity list from a previous project, and
 Existing formal and informal activity planning-related policies, procedures, and guidelines, such as the 

scheduling methodology, that are considered in developing the activity de˜nitions.
6.2.2 Define Activities: Tools and Techniques6.2.2.1 DecompositionDecomposition is a technique used for dividing and subdividing the project scope and project deliverables into smaller, more manageable parts. Activities represent the effort needed to complete a work package. The De˜ne 

Activities process de˜nes the ˜nal outputs as activities rather than deliverables, as done in the Create WBS process 

(Section 5.4).Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.152©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTThe activity list, WBS, and WBS dictionary can be developed either sequentially or concurrently, with the WBS 
and WBS dictionary as the basis for development of the ˜nal activity list. Each work package within the WBS is 

decomposed into the activities required to produce the work package deliverables. Involving team members in the 

decomposition can lead to better and more accurate results.
6.2.2.2 Rolling Wave Planning
Rolling wave planning is an iterative planning technique in which the work to be accomplished in the near term 
is planned in detail, while the work in the future is planned at a higher level. It is a form of progressive elaboration. 

Therefore, work can exist at various levels of detail depending on where it is in the project life cycle. During early 

strategic planning, when information is less de˜ned, work packages may be decomposed to the known level of 

detail. As more is known about the upcoming events in the near term, work packages can be decomposed into 

activities.6.2.2.3 Expert JudgmentProject team members or other experts, who are experienced and skilled in developing detailed project scope 
statements, the WBS, and project schedules, can provide expertise in de˜ning activities.
6.2.3 Define Activities: Outputs6.2.3.1 Activity ListThe activity list is a comprehensive list that includes all schedule activities required on the project. The activity 
list also includes the activity identi˜er and a scope of work description for each activity in suf˜cient detail to ensure 

that project team members understand what work is required to be completed. Each activity should have a unique 

title that describes its place in the schedule, even if that activity title is displayed outside the context of the project 

schedule.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.153©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.2.3.2 Activity AttributesActivities, distinct from milestones, have durations, during which the work of that activity is performed, 
and may have resources and costs associated with that work. Activity attributes extend the description of 

the activity by identifying the multiple components associated with each activity. The components for each 

activity evolve over time. During the initial stages of the project, they include the activity identi˜er (ID), WBS ID, 

and activity label or name, and when completed, may include activity codes, activity description, predecessor 

activities, successor activities, logical relationships, leads and lags (Section 6.3.2.3), resource requirements, 

imposed dates, constraints, and assumptions. Activity attributes can be used to identify the person responsible 

for executing the work, geographic area, or place where the work has to be performed, the project calendar 

the activity is assigned to, and activity type such as level of effort (often abbreviated as LOE), discrete effort, 

and apportioned effort. Activity attributes are used for schedule development and for selecting, ordering, and  

sorting the planned schedule activities in various ways within reports. The number of attributes varies by 

application area.
6.2.3.3 Milestone ListA milestone is a signi˜cant point or event in a project. A milestone list is a list identifying all project milestones 
and indicates whether the milestone is mandatory, such as those required by contract, or optional, such as those 

based upon historical information. Milestones are similar to regular schedule activities, with the same structure and 

attributes, but they have zero duration because milestones represent a moment in time.
6.3 Sequence ActivitiesSequence Activities is the process of identifying and documenting relationships among the project activities. The 
key bene˜t of this process is that it de˜nes the logical sequence of work to obtain the greatest ef˜ciency given all 

project constraints. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-7. Figure 

6-8 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Schedule management  
 plan
.2 Activity list
.3 Activity attributes
.4 Milestone list
.5 Project scope statement
.6 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.7 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Precedence diagramming  
 method (PDM)
.2 Dependency   
 determination
.3 Leads and lags
.1 Project schedule network  
 diagrams
.2 Project documents  

 updatesFigure 6-7. Sequence Activities: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.154©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTProject Time Management
6.3SequenceActivities6.2DefineActivities6.1Plan ScheduleManagement6.6DevelopSchedule
A




P

P
ProjectDocuments







5.3DefineScopeEnterprise/
OrganizationFigure 6-8. Sequence Activities 
Data Flow DiagramEvery activity and milestone except the ˜rst and last should be connected to at least one predecessor with a 
˜nish-to-start or start-to-start logical relationship and at least one successor with a ˜nish-to-start or ˜nish-to-

˜nish logical relationship. Logical relationships should be designed to create a realistic project schedule. It may 

be necessary to use lead or lag time between activities to support a realistic and achievable project schedule. 

Sequencing can be performed by using project management software or by using manual or automated techniques.
6.3.1 Sequence Activities: Inputs6.3.1.1 Schedule Management PlanDescribed in Section 6.1.3.1. The schedule management plan identi˜es the scheduling method and tool to be 
used for the project, which will guide how the activities may be sequenced.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.155©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.3.1.2 Activity ListDescribed in Section 6.2.3.1. The activity list contains all schedule activities required on the project, which 
are to be sequenced. Dependencies and other constraints for these activities can in˚uence the sequencing of the 

activities.6.3.1.3 Activity AttributesDescribed in Section 6.2.3.2. Activity attributes may describe a necessary sequence of events or de˜ned 
predecessor or successor relationships.
6.3.1.4 Milestone ListDescribed in Section 6.2.3.3. The milestone list may have scheduled dates for speci˜c milestones, which may 
in˚uence the way activities are sequenced.6.3.1.5 Project Scope StatementDescribed in Section 5.3.3.1. The project scope statement contains the product scope description, which includes 
product characteristics that may affect activity sequencing, such as the physical layout of a plant to be constructed 

or subsystem interfaces on a software project. Other information from the project scope statement including project 

deliverables, project constraints, and project assumptions may also affect activity sequencing. While these effects 

are often apparent in the activity list, the product scope description is generally reviewed to ensure accuracy.
6.3.1.6 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. Enterprise environmental factors that in˚uence the Sequence Activities process 
include, but are not limited to:
Government or industry standards,
Project management information system (PMIS),
Scheduling tool, and
Company work authorization systems.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.156©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.3.1.7 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Sequence Activities process 
include, but are not limited to: project ˜les from the corporate knowledge base used for scheduling methodology, 

existing formal and informal activity planning-related policies, procedures, and guidelines, such as the scheduling 

methodology that are considered in developing logical relationships, and templates that can be used to expedite the 

preparation of networks of project activities. Related activity attributes information in templates can also contain 

additional descriptive information useful in sequencing activities.
6.3.2 Sequence Activities: Tools and Techniques6.3.2.1 Precedence Diagramming MethodThe precedence diagramming method (PDM) is a technique used for constructing a schedule model in which 
activities are represented by nodes and are graphically linked by one or more logical relationships to show the 

sequence in which the activities are to be performed. Activity-on-node (AON) is one method of representing a 

precedence diagram. This is the method used by most project management software packages.
PDM includes four types of dependencies or logical relationships. A predecessor activity is an activity that 
logically comes before a dependent activity in a schedule. A successor activity is a dependent activity that logically 

comes after another activity in a schedule. These relationships are de˜ned below and are illustrated in Figure 6-9:
 Finish-to-start (FS). 
A logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot start until a predecessor 

activity has ˜nished. Example: The awards ceremony (successor) cannot start until the race (predecessor) 

has ˜nished. Finish-to-finish (FF). 
A logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot ˜nish until a predecessor 

activity has ˜nished. Example: Writing a document (predecessor) is required to ˜nish before editing the 

document (successor) can ˜nish. Start-to-start (SS). A logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot start until a predecessor 

activity has started. Example: Level concrete (successor) cannot begin until pour foundation (predecessor) 

begins. Start-to-finish (SF). A logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot ˜nish until a predecessor 

activity has started. Example: The ˜rst security guard shift (successor) cannot ˜nish until the second 

security guard shift (predecessor) starts.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.157©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6In PDM, ˜nish-to-start is the most commonly used type of precedence relationship. The start-to-˜nish relationship 
is very rarely used but is included to present a complete list of the PDM relationship types.
Activity A
Activity BActivity A
Activity A
Activity BActivity BActivity A
Activity BFinish to Start (FS)
Start to Finish (SF)
Start to Start (SS)
Finish to Finish (FF)
Figure 6-9. Precedence 
Diagramming Method (PDM) Relationship Types6.3.2.2 Dependency 
DeterminationDependencies may be characterized by the following attributes: mandatory or discretionary, internal or external, 
as described below. Dependency has four attributes, but two can be applicable at the same time in following 

ways: mandatory external dependencies, mandatory internal dependencies, discretionary external dependencies, 

or discretionary internal dependencies.
 Mandatory dependencies. 
Mandatory dependencies are those that are legally or contractually required 
or inherent in the nature of the work. Mandatory dependencies often involve physical limitations, such 

as on a construction project, where it is impossible to erect the superstructure until after the foundation 

has been built, or on an electronics project, where a prototype has to be built before it can be tested. 

Mandatory dependencies are also sometimes referred to as hard logic or hard dependencies. Technical 

dependencies may not be mandatory. The project team determines which dependencies are mandatory 

during the process of sequencing the activities. Mandatory dependencies should not be confused with 

assigning schedule constraints in the scheduling tool.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.158©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT Discretionary dependencies. 
Discretionary dependencies are sometimes referred to as preferred logic, 
preferential logic, or soft logic. Discretionary dependencies are established based on knowledge of best 

practices within a particular application area or some unusual aspect of the project where a speci˜c 

sequence is desired, even though there may be other acceptable sequences. Discretionary dependencies 

should be fully documented since they can create arbitrary total ˚oat values and can limit later scheduling 

options. When fast tracking techniques are employed, these discretionary dependencies should be 

reviewed and considered for modi˜cation or removal. The project team determines which dependencies 

are discretionary during the process of sequencing the activities.
 External dependencies. 
External dependencies involve a relationship between project activities and 
non-project activities. These dependencies are usually outside the project team™s control. For example, 

the testing activity in a software project may be dependent on the delivery of hardware from an external 

source, or governmental environmental hearings may need to be held before site preparation can begin 

on a construction project. The project management team determines which dependencies are external 

during the process of sequencing the activities. Internal dependencies.
 Internal dependencies involve a precedence relationship between project 

activities and are generally inside the project team™s control. For example, if the team cannot test a 

machine until they assemble it, this is an internal mandatory dependency. The project management team 

determines which dependencies are internal during the process of sequencing the activities.6.3.2.3 Leads and LagsA lead is the amount of time whereby a successor activity can be advanced with respect to a predecessor activity. For example, on a project to construct a new of˜ce building, the landscaping could be scheduled to start 

two weeks prior to the scheduled punch list completion. This would be shown as a ˜nish-to-start with a two-week 

lead as shown in Figure 6-10. Lead is often represented as a negative value for lag in scheduling software.
CompletePunch ListWriteDraft
LandscapeBuilding LotEditDraft
SS Œ 15 Days (Lag)
FS Œ 2 Weeks (Lead)
Figure 6-10. Examples of Lead and Lag
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.159©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6A lag is the amount of time whereby a successor activity will be delayed with respect to a predecessor activity. 
For example, a technical writing team may begin editing the draft of a large document 15 days after they begin 

writing it. This can be shown as a start-to-start relationship with a 15-day lag as shown in Figure 6-10. Lag can 

also be represented in project schedule network diagrams as shown in Figure 6-11 in the relationship between 

activities H and I, as indicated by the nomenclature SS+10 (start-to-start plus 10 days lag) even though offset is 

not shown relative to a timescale.
The project management team determines the dependencies that may require a lead or a lag to accurately 
de˜ne the logical relationship. The use of leads and lags should not replace schedule logic. Activities and their 

related assumptions should be documented.
6.3.3 Sequence Activities: Outputs6.3.3.1 Project Schedule Network DiagramsA project schedule network diagram is a graphical representation of the logical relationships, also referred to as 
dependencies, among the project schedule activities. Figure 6-11 illustrates a project schedule network diagram. A 

project schedule network diagram is produced manually or by using project management software. It can include 

full project details, or have one or more summary activities. A summary narrative can accompany the diagram and 

describe the basic approach used to sequence the activities. Any unusual activity sequences within the network 

should be fully described within the narrative.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.160©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTABCDEBegin
HFGEndIJKLFFFS + 15SS + 10SSFigure 6-11. Project Schedule 
Network Diagram6.3.3.2 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Activity lists,Activity attributes,
Milestone list, and
Risk register.
6.4 Estimate Activity ResourcesEstimate Activity Resources is the process of estimating the type and quantities of material, human 
resources, equipment, or supplies required to perform each activity. The key bene˜t of this process is that it 

identi˜es the type, quantity, and characteristics of resources required to complete the activity which allows 

more accurate cost and duration estimates. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are 

depicted in Figure 6-12. Figure 6-13 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.161©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Schedule management  
 plan
.2 Activity list
.3 Activity attributes
.4 Resource calendars
.5 Risk register
.6 Activity cost estimates
.7 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.8 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Alternative analysis
.3 Published estimating data
.4 Bottom-up estimating
.5 Project management  
 software
.1 Activity resource  
 requirements
.2 Resource breakdown  

 structure

.3 Project documents  

 updatesFigure 6-12. Estimate Activity 
Resources: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsProject Time Management
6.4EstimateActivityResources6.2DefineActivities6.1Plan ScheduleManagement6.6DevelopSchedule6.5 Estimate ActivityDurationsA



A
P
A
ProjectDocuments

R
A
O





12.2ConductProcurements9.2AcquireProject Team
11.2IdentifyRisks7.2EstimateCostsEnterprise/
Organization12.1PlanProcurementManagement9.1Plan HumanResourceManagementFigure 6-13. Estimate Activity 
Resources Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.162©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTThe Estimate Activity Resources process is closely coordinated with the Estimate Costs process (Section 7.2). 
For example:
 A construction project team will need to be familiar with local building codes. Such knowledge is often 

readily available from local sellers. However, if the local labor pool lacks experience with unusual or 

specialized construction techniques, the additional cost for a consultant may be the most effective way 

to secure knowledge of the local building codes.
 An automotive design team will need to be familiar with the latest in automated assembly techniques. 

The requisite knowledge might be obtained by hiring a consultant, by sending a designer to a seminar on 

robotics, or by including someone from manufacturing as a member of the project team.
6.4.1 Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs6.4.1.1 Schedule Management PlanDescribed in Section 6.1.3.1. The schedule management plan identi˜es the level of accuracy and the units of 
measure for the resources to be estimated.
6.4.1.2 Activity ListDescribed in Section 6.2.3.1. The activity list identi˜es the activities which will need resources.
6.4.1.3 Activity AttributesDescribed in Section 6.2.3.2. The activity attributes provide the primary data input for use in estimating those 
resources required for each activity in the activity list.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.163©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.4.1.4 Resource CalendarsDescribed in Sections 9.2.3.2 and 12.2.3.3. A resource calendar is a calendar that identi˜es the working 

days and shifts on which each speci˜c resource is available. Information on which resources (such as human 

resources, equipment, and material) are potentially available during a planned activity period, is used for 

estimating resource utilization. Resource calendars specify when and how long identi˜ed project resources 

will be available during the project. This information may be at the activity or project level. This knowledge 

includes consideration of attributes such as resource experience and/or skill level, as well as various 

geographical locations from which the resources originate and when they may be available. 
6.4.1.5 Risk RegisterDescribed in Section 11.2.3.1. Risk events may impact resource selection and availability. Updates to the risk 
register are included with project documents updates, described in Section 11.5.3.2, from Plan Risk Responses.
6.4.1.6 Activity Cost EstimatesDescribed in Section 7.2.3.1. The cost of resources may impact resource selection.
6.4.1.7 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that can in˚uence the Estimate Activity 
Resources process include, but are not limited to, resource location, availability, and skills.
6.4.1.8 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Estimate Activity Resources 
process include, but are not limited to:
Policies and procedures regarding staf˜ng,
Policies and procedures relating to rental and purchase of supplies and equipment, and
Historical information regarding types of resources used for similar work on previous projects.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.164©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.4.2 Estimate Activity Resources: Tools and Techniques6.4.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment is often required to assess the resource-related inputs to this process. Any group or person 
with specialized knowledge in resource planning and estimating can provide such expertise.
6.4.2.2 Alternative AnalysisMany schedule activities have alternative methods of accomplishment. They include using various levels of 
resource capability or skills, different size or type of machines, different tools (hand versus automated), and make-

rent-or-buy decisions regarding the resource (Section 12.1.3.5).
6.4.2.3 Published Estimating DataSeveral organizations routinely publish updated production rates and unit costs of resources for an extensive 
array of labor trades, material, and equipment for different countries and geographical locations within countries.
6.4.2.4 Bottom-Up EstimatingBottom-up estimating is a method of estimating project duration or cost by aggregating the estimates of the 
lower-level components of the WBS. When an activity cannot be estimated with a reasonable degree of con˜dence, 

the work within the activity is decomposed into more detail. The resource needs are estimated. These estimates 

are then aggregated into a total quantity for each of the activity™s resources. Activities may or may not have 

dependencies between them that can affect the application and use of resources. If there are dependencies, this 

pattern of resource usage is re˚ected and documented in the estimated requirements of the activity.
6.4.2.5 Project Management SoftwareProject management software, such as a scheduling software tool, has the capability to help plan, organize, and 
manage resource pools and develop resource estimates. Depending on the sophistication of the software, resource 

breakdown structures, resource availability, resource rates, and various resource calendars can be de˜ned to assist 

in optimizing resource utilization.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.165©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.4.3 Estimate Activity Resources: Outputs6.4.3.1 Activity Resource RequirementsActivity resource requirements identify the types and quantities of resources required for each activity in a work package. These requirements then can be aggregated to determine the estimated resources for each work package 

and each work period. The amount of detail and the level of speci˜city of the resource requirement descriptions 

can vary by application area. The resource requirements documentation for each activity can include the basis of 

estimate for each resource, as well as the assumptions that were made in determining which types of resources 

are applied, their availability, and what quantities are used.
6.4.3.2 Resource Breakdown StructureThe resource breakdown structure is a hierarchical representation of resources by category and type. Examples 
of resource categories include labor, material, equipment, and supplies. Resource types may include the skill level, 

grade level, or other information as appropriate to the project. The resource breakdown structure is useful for 

organizing and reporting project schedule data with resource utilization information.
6.4.3.3 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Activity list,Activity attributes, and
Resource calendars.6.5 Estimate Activity DurationsEstimate Activity Durations is the process of estimating the number of work periods needed to complete 
individual activities with estimated resources. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides the amount of time 

each activity will take to complete, which is a major input into the Develop Schedule process. The inputs, tools and 

techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-14. Figure 6-15 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of 

the process.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.166©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTInputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs .1 Schedule management  
  plan
 .2 Activity list
 .3 Activity attributes
 .4 Activity resource  
  requirements
 .5 Resource calendars
 .6 Project scope statement
 .7 Risk register
 .8 Resource breakdown  
  structure
 .9 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
.10 Organizational process  
  assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Analogous estimating
.3 Parametric estimating
.4 Three-point estimating
.5 Group decision-making  
 techniques
.6 Reserve analysis
.1 Activity duration  
 estimates
.2 Project documents  

 updatesFigure 6-14. Estimate Activity 
Durations: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsProject Time Management
6.5EstimateActivityDurations6.1Plan ScheduleManagement6.2DefineActivities6.4Estimate ActivityResources6.6DevelopScheduleA



A


P
Activity



ProjectDocuments










O





12.2ConductProcurement9.2AcquireProject Team
11.2IdentifyRisks5.3DefineScopeEnterprise/
Organization11.2IdentifyRisksFigure 6-15. Estimate Activity 
Durations Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.167©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6Estimating activity durations uses information on activity scope of work, required resource types, estimated 
resource quantities, and resource calendars. The inputs of the estimates of activity duration originate from the 

person or group on the project team who is most familiar with the nature of the work in the speci˜c activity. The 

duration estimate is progressively elaborated, and the process considers the quality and availability of the input 

data. For example, as more detailed and precise data is available about the project engineering and design work, 

the accuracy of the duration estimates improves. Thus, the duration estimate can be assumed to be progressively 

more accurate and of better quality.
The Estimate Activity Durations process requires an estimation of the amount of work effort required to complete 
the activity and the amount of available resources estimated to complete the activity. These estimates are used to 

approximate the number of work periods (activity duration) needed to complete the activity using the appropriate 

project and resource calendars. All data and assumptions that support duration estimating are documented for 

each estimate of activity duration.
6.5.1 Estimate Activity Durations: Inputs6.5.1.1 Schedule Management PlanDescribed in Section 6.1.3.1. The schedule management plan de˜nes the method used and the level of accuracy 
along with other criteria required to estimate activity durations including the project update cycle.
6.5.1.2 Activity ListDescribed in Section 6.2.3.1. The activity list identi˜es the activities that will need duration estimates.
6.5.1.3 Activity AttributesDescribed in Section 6.2.3.2. The activity attributes provide the primary data input for use in estimating durations 
required for each activity in the activity list.6.5.1.4 Activity Resource RequirementsDescribed in Section 6.4.3.1. The estimated activity resource requirements will have an effect on the duration of 
the activity, since the level to which the resources assigned to the activity meet the requirements will signi˜cantly 

in˚uence the duration of most activities. For example, if additional or lower-skilled resources are assigned to an 

activity, there may be reduced ef˜ciency or productivity due to increased communication, training, and coordination 

needs leading to a longer duration estimate.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.168©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.5.1.5 Resource CalendarsDescribed in Section 6.4.1.4. The resource calendars in˚uence the duration of schedule activities due to the 
availability of speci˜c resources, type of resources, and resources with speci˜c attributes. For example, when staff 

members are assigned to an activity on a full-time basis, in general, a skilled staff member can be expected to 

complete a given activity in less time than a relatively less-skilled staff member.
6.5.1.6 Project Scope StatementDescribed in Section 5.3.3.1. The assumptions and constraints from the project scope statement are considered 
when estimating the activity durations. Examples of assumptions include, but are not limited to:
Existing conditions,Availability of information, and
Length of the reporting periods.Examples of constraints include, but are not limited to:
Available skilled resources, and
Contract terms and requirements.6.5.1.7 Risk RegisterDescribed in Section 11.2.3.1. The risk register provides the list of risks, along with the results of risk analysis 
and risk response planning. Updates to the risk register are included with project document updates described in 

Section 11.5.3.2.6.5.1.8 Resource Breakdown StructureDescribed in Section 6.4.3.2. The resource breakdown structure provides a hierarchical structure of the identi˜ed 
resources by resource category and resource type.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.169©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.5.1.9 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that can in˚uence the Estimate Activity 
Durations process include, but are not limited to:
Duration estimating databases and other reference data,
Productivity metrics,Published commercial information, and
Location of team members.
6.5.1.10 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Estimate Activity Durations 
process include, but are not limited to:
Historical duration information,
Project calendars,Scheduling methodology, and
Lessons learned.6.5.2 Estimate Activity Durations: Tools and Techniques6.5.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment, guided by historical information, can provide duration estimate information or recommended 
maximum activity durations from prior similar projects. Expert judgment can also be used to determine whether to 

combine methods of estimating and how to reconcile differences between them.
6.5.2.2 Analogous EstimatingAnalogous estimating is a technique for estimating the duration or cost of an activity or a project using 
historical data from a similar activity or project. Analogous estimating uses parameters from a previous, 

similar project, such as duration, budget, size, weight, and complexity, as the basis for estimating the same 

parameter or measure for a future project. When estimating durations, this technique relies on the actual 

duration of previous, similar projects as the basis for estimating the duration of the current project. It is a 

gross value estimating approach, sometimes adjusted for known differences in project complexity. Analogous 

duration estimating is frequently used to estimate project duration when there is a limited amount of detailed 

information about the project.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.170©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTAnalogous estimating is generally less costly and less time consuming than other techniques, but it is also 
less accurate. Analogous duration estimates can be applied to a total project or to segments of a project and may 

be used in conjunction with other estimating methods. Analogous estimating is most reliable when the previous 

activities are similar in fact and not just in appearance, and the project team members preparing the estimates 

have the needed expertise.
6.5.2.3 Parametric Estimating
Parametric estimating is an estimating technique in which an algorithm is used to calculate cost or duration 
based on historical data and project parameters. Parametric estimating uses a statistical relationship between 

historical data and other variables (e.g., square footage in construction) to calculate an estimate for activity 

parameters, such as cost, budget, and duration.
Activity durations can be quantitatively determined by multiplying the quantity of work to be performed by labor 
hours per unit of work. For example, activity duration on a design project is estimated by the number of drawings 

multiplied by the number of labor hours per drawing, or on a cable installation, the meters of cable multiplied by the 

number of labor hours per meter. For example, if the assigned resource is capable of installing 25 meters of cable 

per hour, the duration required to install 1,000 meters is 40 hours. (1,000 meters divided by 25 meters per hour).
This technique can produce higher levels of accuracy depending upon the sophistication and underlying data 
built into the model. Parametric time estimates can be applied to a total project or to segments of a project, in 

conjunction with other estimating methods.
6.5.2.4 Three-Point Estimating
The accuracy of single-point activity duration estimates may be improved by considering estimation uncertainty 
and risk. This concept originated with the program evaluation and review technique (PERT). PERT uses three 

estimates to de˜ne an approximate range for an activity™s duration:
 Most likely (tM). This estimate is based on the duration of the activity, given the resources likely to be 

assigned, their productivity, realistic expectations of availability for the activity, dependencies on other 

participants, and interruptions.
Optimistic (tO). The activity duration based on analysis of the best-case scenario for the activity.
Pessimistic
 (tP). The activity duration based on analysis of the worst-case scenario for the activity.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.171©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6Depending on the assumed distribution of values within the range of the three estimates the expected duration, 
tE, can be calculated using a formula. Two commonly used formulas are triangular and beta distributions. The 

formulas are:Triangular Distribution. tE = (tO + tM + tP) / 3Beta Distribution (from the traditional PERT technique). 
tE = (tO + 4tM + tP) / 6Duration estimates based on three points with an assumed distribution provide an expected duration and clarify 
the range of uncertainty around the expected duration.
6.5.2.5 Group Decision-Making TechniquesTeam-based approaches, such as brainstorming, the Delphi or nominal group techniques, are useful for engaging 
team members to improve estimate accuracy and commitment to the emerging estimates. By involving a structured 

group of people who are close to the technical execution of work in the estimation process, additional information 

is gained and more accurate estimates obtained. Additionally, when people are involved in the estimation process, 

their commitment towards meeting the resulting estimates increases.
6.5.2.6 Reserve Analysis
Duration estimates may include contingency reserves, sometimes referred to as time reserves or buffers, 
into the project schedule to account for schedule uncertainty. Contingency reserves are the estimated duration 

within the schedule baseline, which is allocated for identi˜ed risks that are accepted and for which contingent or 

mitigation responses are developed. Contingency reserves are associated with the ﬁknown-unknowns,ﬂ which may 

be estimated to account for this unknown amount of rework. The contingency reserve may be a percentage of the 

estimated activity duration, a ˜xed number of work periods, or may be developed by using quantitative analysis 

methods such as Monte Carlo simulation (Section 11.4.2.2). Contingency reserves may be separated from the 

individual activities and aggregated into buffers as shown in Figure 6-19.
As more precise information about the project becomes available, the contingency reserve may be used, 
reduced, or eliminated. Contingency should be clearly identi˜ed in schedule documentation.
Estimates may also be produced for the amount of management reserve of time for the project. Management 
reserves are a speci˜ed amount of the project duration withheld for management control purposes and are 

reserved for unforeseen work that is within scope of the project. Management reserves are intended to address the 

ﬁunknown-unknownsﬂ that can affect a project. Management reserve is not included in the schedule baseline, but 

it is part of the overall project duration requirements. Depending on contract terms, use of management reserves 

may require a change to the schedule baseline.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.172©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.5.3 Estimate Activity Durations: Outputs6.5.3.1 Activity Duration EstimatesActivity duration estimates are quantitative assessments of the likely number of time periods that are required 
to complete an activity. Duration estimates do not include any lags as described in Section 6.3.2.3. Activity duration 

estimates may include some indication of the range of possible results. For example:
 2 weeks ± 2 days, which indicates that the activity will take at least eight days and not more than twelve 

(assuming a ˜ve-day workweek); and 15 % probability of exceeding three weeks, which indicates a high probabilityŠ85 %Šthat the activity 

will take three weeks or less.6.5.3.2 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Activity attributes; and
 Assumptions made in developing the activity duration estimate, such as skill levels and availability,  
as well as a basis of estimates for durations.
6.6 Develop ScheduleDevelop Schedule is the process of analyzing activity sequences, durations, resource requirements, and 
schedule constraints to create the project schedule model. The key bene˜t of this process is that by entering 

schedule activities, durations, resources, resource availabilities, and logical relationships into the scheduling tool, it 

generates a schedule model with planned dates for completing project activities. The inputs, tools and techniques, 

and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-16. Figure 6-17 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.173©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs .1 Schedule management   
  plan
 .2 Activity list
 .3 Activity attributes
 .4 Project schedule   
  network diagrams
 .5 Activity resource   
  requirements
 .6 Resource calendars
 .7 Activity duration   
  estimates
 .8 Project scope statement
 .9 Risk register
 .10 Project staff assignments
.11 Resource breakdown   
  structure
.12 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
.13 Organizational process   
  assets
.1 Schedule network  
 analysis
.2 Critical path method
.3 Critical chain method
.4 Resource optimization  
 techniques
.5 Modeling techniques
.6 Leads and lags
.7 Schedule compression
.8 Scheduling tool
.1 Schedule baseline
.2 Project schedule
.3 Schedule data
.4 Project calendars
.5 Project management plan  
 updates
.6 Project documents  

 updatesFigure 6-16 Develop Schedule: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsProject Time Management
6.6Develop
Schedule6.7ControlSchedule
A

A


A
P
PProject





Project

t
ProjectDocuments


rP






12.2ConductProcurements9.2AcquireProject Team
11.2IdentifyRisks5.3DefineScopeEnterprise/
Organization7.3Determine
Budget7.2EstimateCosts4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan12.1Plan ProcurementManagement6.5Estimate ActivityDurations6.4Estimate ActivityResources6.3SequenceActivities6.2DefineActivities
e

6.1Plan ScheduleManagementFigure 6-17. 
Develop Schedule Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.174©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTDeveloping an acceptable project schedule is often an iterative process. The schedule model is used to 
determine the planned start and ˜nish dates for project activities and milestones based on the accuracy of the 

inputs. Schedule development can require the review and revision of duration estimates and resource estimates to 

create the project schedule model to establish an approved project schedule that can serve as a baseline to track 

progress. Once the activity start and ˜nish dates have been determined, it is common to have project staff assigned 

to the activities review their assigned activities and con˜rm that the start and ˜nish dates present no con˚ict with 

resource calendars or assigned activities in other projects or tasks and thus are still valid. As work progresses, 

revising and maintaining the project schedule model to sustain a realistic schedule continues throughout the 
duration of the project, as described in Section 6.7.
For more speci˜c information regarding scheduling, refer to the 
Practice Standard for Scheduling.6.6.1 Develop Schedule: Inputs6.6.1.1 Schedule Management PlanDescribed in Section 6.1.3.1. The schedule management plan identi˜es the scheduling method and tool used to 
create the schedule, and how the schedule is to be calculated.
6.6.1.2 Activity ListDescribed in Section 6.2.3.1. The activity list identi˜es the activities that will be included in the schedule model.
6.6.1.3 Activity AttributesDescribed in Section 6.2.3.2. The activity attributes provide the details used to build the schedule model.
6.6.1.4 Project Schedule Network DiagramsDescribed in Section 6.3.3.1. The project schedule network diagrams contain the logical relationships of 
predecessors and successors that will be used to calculate the schedule.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.175©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.6.1.5 Activity Resource RequirementsDescribed in Section 6.4.3.1. The activity resource requirements identify the types and quantities of resources 
required for each activity used to create the schedule model.
6.6.1.6 Resource CalendarsDescribed in Sections 9.2.3.2 and 12.2.3.3. The resource calendars contain information on the availability of 
resources during the project.6.6.1.7 Activity Duration EstimatesDescribed in Section 6.5.3.1. The activity duration estimates contain the quantitative assessments of the likely 
number of work periods that will be required to complete an activity that will be used to calculate the schedule.
6.6.1.8 Project Scope StatementDescribed in Section 5.3.3.1. The project scope statement contains assumptions and constraints that can impact 
the development of the project schedule.6.6.1.9 Risk RegisterDescribed in Section 11.2.3.1. The risk register provides the details of all identi˜ed risks and their characteristics 
that affect the schedule model.
6.6.1.10 Project Staff AssignmentsDescribed in Section 9.2.3.1. The project staff assignments specify which resources are assigned to each 
activity.
6.6.1.11 Resource Breakdown StructureDescribed in Section 6.4.3.2. The resource breakdown structure provides the details by which resource analysis 
and organizational reporting can be done.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.176©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.6.1.12 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors include, but are not limited to:
Standards,Communication channels, and
Scheduling tool to be used in developing the schedule model.6.6.1.13 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Develop Schedule process 
include, but are not limited to: scheduling methodology and project calendar(s).
6.6.2 Develop Schedule: Tools and Techniques6.6.2.1 Schedule Network AnalysisSchedule network analysis is a technique that generates the project schedule model. It employs various analytical 
techniques, such as critical path method, critical chain method, what-if analysis, and resource optimization 

techniques to calculate the early and late start and ˜nish dates for the uncompleted portions of project activities. 

Some network paths may have points of path convergence or path divergence that can be identi˜ed and used in 

schedule compression analysis or other analyses.6.6.2.2 Critical Path Method
The critical path method, which is a method used to estimate the minimum project duration and determine the 
amount of scheduling ˚exibility on the logical network paths within the schedule model. This schedule network 

analysis technique calculates the early start, early ˜nish, late start, and late ˜nish dates for all activities without 

regard for any resource limitations by performing a forward and backward pass analysis through the schedule 

network, as shown in Figure 6-18. In this example the longest path includes activities A, C, and D, and, therefore, the 

sequence of A-C-D is the critical path. The critical path is the sequence of activities that represents the longest path 

through a project, which determines the shortest possible project duration. The resulting early and late start and 

˜nish dates are not necessarily the project schedule, rather they indicate the time periods within which the activity 

could be executed, using the parameters entered in the schedule model for activity durations, logical relationships, 

leads, lags, and other known constraints. The critical path method is used to calculate the amount of scheduling 

˚exibility on the logical network paths within the schedule model.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.177©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6On any network path, the schedule ˚exibility is measured by the amount of time that a schedule activity can 
be delayed or extended from its early start date without delaying the project ˜nish date or violating a schedule 

constraint, and is termed ﬁtotal ˚oat.ﬂ A CPM critical path is normally characterized by zero total ˚oat on the 

critical path. As implemented with PDM sequencing, critical paths may have positive, zero, or negative total 

˚oat depending on constraints applied. Any activity on the critical path is called a critical path activity. Positive 

total ˚oat is caused when the backward pass is calculated from a schedule constraint that is later than the 

early ˜nish date that has been calculated during forward pass calculation. Negative total ˚oat is caused when a 

constraint on the late dates is violated by duration and logic. Schedule networks may have multiple near-critical 

paths. Many software packages allow the user to de˜ne the parameters used to determine the critical path(s). 

Adjustments to activity durations (if more resources or less scope can be arranged), logical relationships (if the 

relationships were discretionary to begin with), leads and lags, or other schedule constraints may be necessary 

to produce network paths with a zero or positive total ˚oat. Once the total ˚oat for a network path has been 

calculated, then the free ˚oatŠthe amount of time that a schedule activity can be delayed without delaying the 

early start date of any successor or violating a schedule constraintŠcan also be determined. For example the 

free ˚oat for Activity B, in Figure 6-18, is 5 days.
Critical Path Link
Non-Critical Path Link
Activity
NodeStart
Finish
A155
105
C61015
6015
B6510
11515
D161530
16030
Activity NameEarly
Start
DurationEarly
Finish
LateStart
Total
FloatLateFinish
Path AŒBŒD = 25
Path AŒCŒD = 30
(Critical Path)
KEYFigure 6-18. Example of 
Critical Path Method
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.178©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.6.2.3 Critical Chain MethodThe critical chain method (CCM) is a schedule method that allows the project team to place buffers on any 
project schedule path to account for limited resources and project uncertainties. It is developed from the critical 

path method approach and considers the effects of resource allocation, resource optimization, resource leveling, 

and activity duration uncertainty on the critical path determined using the critical path method. To do so, the critical 

chain method introduces the concept of buffers and buffer management. The critical chain method uses activities 

with durations that do not include safety margins, logical relationships, and resource availability with statistically 

determined buffers composed of the aggregated safety margins of activities at speci˜ed points on the project 

schedule path to account for limited resources and project uncertainties. The resource-constrained critical path is 

known as the critical chain.
The critical chain method adds duration buffers that are non-work schedule activities to manage uncertainty. 
One buffer, placed at the end of the critical chain, as shown in Figure 6-19, is known as the project buffer and 

protects the target ˜nish date from slippage along the critical chain. Additional buffers, known as feeding buffers, 

are placed at each point where a chain of dependent activities that are not on the critical chain feeds into the critical 

chain. Feeding buffers thus protect the critical chain from slippage along the feeding chains. The size of each buffer 

should account for the uncertainty in the duration of the chain of dependent activities leading up to that buffer. Once 

the buffer schedule activities are determined, the planned activities are scheduled to their latest possible planned 

start and ˜nish dates. Consequently, instead of managing the total ˚oat of network paths, the critical chain method 

focuses on managing the remaining buffer durations against the remaining durations of chains of activities.
Activity A
Critical Chain Link
Non-Critical LinkActivity CStart
Finish
Activity GActivity BActivity DFeeding
BufferFeeding
BufferActivity EActivity FProjectBufferKEYFigure 6-19. Example of 
Critical Chain MethodLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.179©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.6.2.4 Resource Optimization TechniquesExamples of resource optimization techniques that can be used to adjust the schedule model due to demand 
and supply of resources include, but are not limited to:
 Resource leveling. 
A technique in which start and ˜nish dates are adjusted based on resource constraints 
with the goal of balancing demand for resources with the available supply. Resource leveling can be used 

when shared or critically required resources are only available at certain times, or in limited quantities, 

or over-allocated, such as when a resource has been assigned to two or more activities during the same 

time period, as shown in Figure 6-20, or to keep resource usage at a constant level. Resource leveling 

can often cause the original critical path to change, usually to increase.
Start
Activity A
Tom: 8 hrs
Sue: 8 hrsActivity BSue: 8 hrsActivity CTom: 8 hrs
Tom: 8 hrs
Sue: 16 hrsTom: 8 hrs
Day 2
Day 3
Day 1
Start
Activity A
Tom: 8 hrs
Sue: 8 hrsActivity BSue: 8 hrsActivity CTom: 8 hrs
Tom: 8 hrs
Sue: 8 hrsSue: 8 hrsTom: 8 hrs
Day 2
Day 3
Day 1
Activities Before Resource Leveling
Activities After Resource Leveling
Figure 6-20. 
Resource LevelingLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.180©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT Resource Smoothing. 
A technique that adjusts the activities of a schedule model such that the 
requirements for resources on the project do not exceed certain prede˜ned resource limits. In resource 

smoothing, as opposed to resource leveling, the project™s critical path is not changed and the completion 

date may not be delayed. In other words, activities may only be delayed within their free and total ˚oat. 

Thus resource smoothing may not be able to optimize all resources.6.6.2.5 Modeling TechniquesExamples of modeling techniques include, but are not limited to:
 What-If Scenario Analysis. 
What-if scenario analysis is the process of evaluating scenarios in order 

to predict their effect, positively or negatively, on project objectives. This is an analysis of the question, 

ﬁWhat if the situation represented by scenario ‚X™ happens?ﬂ A schedule network analysis is performed 

using the schedule to compute the different scenarios, such as delaying a major component delivery, 

extending speci˜c engineering durations, or introducing external factors, such as a strike or a change in 

the permitting process. The outcome of the what-if scenario analysis can be used to assess the feasibility 

of the project schedule under adverse conditions, and in preparing contingency and response plans to 

overcome or mitigate the impact of unexpected situations.
 Simulation. Simulation involves calculating multiple project durations with different sets of activity 

assumptions, usually using probability distributions constructed from the three-point estimates (described 

in Section 6.5.2.4) to account for uncertainty. The most common simulation technique is Monte Carlo 

analysis (Section 11.4.2.2), in which a distribution of possible activity durations is de˜ned for each activity 

and used to calculate a distribution of possible outcomes for the total project.
6.6.2.6 Leads and LagsDescribed in Section 6.3.2.3. Leads and lags are re˜nements applied during network analysis to develop a 
viable schedule by adjusting the start time of the successor activities. Leads are used in limited circumstances to 

advance a successor activity with respect to the predecessor activity, and lags are used in limited circumstances 

where processes require a set period of time to elapse between the predecessors and successors without work or 

resource impact.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.181©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.6.2.7 Schedule CompressionSchedule compression techniques are used to shorten the schedule duration without reducing the project 
scope, in order to meet schedule constraints, imposed dates, or other schedule objectives. Schedule compression 

techniques include, but are not limited to:
 Crashing. 
A technique used to shorten the schedule duration for the least incremental cost by adding 
resources. Examples of crashing include approving overtime, bringing in additional resources, or paying 

to expedite delivery to activities on the critical path. Crashing works only for activities on the critical path 

where additional resources will shorten the activity™s duration. Crashing does not always produce a viable 

alternative and may result in increased risk and/or cost.
 Fast tracking.
 A schedule compression technique in which activities or phases normally done in sequence 

are performed in parallel for at least a portion of their duration. An example is constructing the foundation 

for a building before completing all of the architectural drawings. Fast tracking may result in rework and 

increased risk. Fast tracking only works if activities can be overlapped to shorten the project duration.
6.6.2.8 Scheduling ToolAutomated scheduling tools contain the schedule model and expedite the scheduling process by generating 
start and ˜nish dates based on the inputs of activities, network diagrams, resources and activity durations using 

schedule network analysis. A scheduling tool can be used in conjunction with other project management software 

applications as well as manual methods.
6.6.3 Develop Schedule: Outputs6.6.3.1 Schedule BaselineA schedule baseline is the approved version of a schedule model that can be changed only through formal 
change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison to actual results. It is accepted and approved by 

the appropriate stakeholders as the schedule baseline with baseline start dates and baseline ˜nish dates. During 

monitoring and controlling, the approved baseline dates are compared to the actual start and ˜nish dates to determine 

whether variances have occurred. The schedule baseline is a component of the project management plan.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.182©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.6.3.2 Project ScheduleThe outputs from a schedule model are schedule presentations. The project schedule is an output of a schedule 
model that presents linked activities with planned dates, durations, milestones, and resources. At a minimum, the 

project schedule includes a planned start date and planned ˜nish date for each activity. If resource planning is done 

at an early stage, then the project schedule remains preliminary until resource assignments have been con˜rmed 

and scheduled start and ˜nish dates are established. This process usually occurs no later than the completion of the 

project management plan (Section 4.2.3.1). A target project schedule model may also be developed with a de˜ned 

target start and target ˜nish for each activity. The project schedule presentation may be presented in summary 

form, sometimes referred to as the master schedule or milestone schedule, or presented in detail. Although a 

project schedule model can be presented in tabular form, it is more often presented graphically, using one or more 

of the following formats, which are classi˜ed as presentations:
 Bar charts. 
These charts, also known as Gantt charts, represent schedule information where activities 
are listed on the vertical axis, dates are shown on the horizontal axis, and activity durations are shown 

as horizontal bars placed according to start and ˜nish dates. Bar charts are relatively easy to read, 

and are frequently used in management presentations. For control and management communications, 

the broader, more comprehensive summary activity, sometimes referred to as a hammock activity, is 

used between milestones or across multiple interdependent work packages, and is displayed in bar 

chart reports. An example is the summary schedule portion of Figure 6-21 that is presented in a WBS-

structured format.
 Milestone charts.
 These charts are similar to bar charts, but only identify the scheduled start or 

completion of major deliverables and key external interfaces. An example is the milestone schedule 

portion of Figure 6-21.
 Project schedule network diagrams. These diagrams are commonly presented in the activity-on-node 

diagram format showing activities and relationships without a time scale, sometimes referred to as a 

pure logic diagram, as shown in Figure 6-11, or presented in a time-scaled schedule network diagram 

format that is sometimes called a logic bar chart, as shown for the detailed schedule in Figure 6-21.These 

diagrams, with activity date information, usually show both the project network logic and the project™s 

critical path schedule activities. This example also shows how each work package is planned as a series 

of related activities. Another presentation of the project schedule network diagram is a time-scaled logic 

diagram. These diagrams include a time scale and bars that represent the duration of activities with the 

logical relationships. It is optimized to show the relationships between activities where any number of 

activities may appear on the same line of the diagram in sequence.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.183©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6Project Schedule Time Frame
Period 5
Period 1Period 2Period 3
ActivityIdentifier
1.1.MBBegin New Product Z
Period 4
CalendarunitsCalendarunitsCalendarunitsComplete Component 1
Complete Component 2 Finish New Product Z
0
0
0
0Activity DescriptionProject Schedule Time Frame
Period 5
Period 1Period 2Period 3
ActivityIdentifier
1.1.MB012067
20
33
14053
14
28
11053
14
320
7
0Period 4
Activity Description1.1.1.M1
1.1.2.M1
1.1.3.MFComplete Integration of Components 1 & 2
01.1.3.M1Project Schedule Time Frame
Period 5
Period 1Period 2Period 3
ActivityIdentifier
1.1Develop and Deliver New Product Z
Period 4
Work Package 1: Component 1 
Work Package 2: Component 2 
Work Package 3: Integrated Components 1 and 2
12067
53
53Activity Description1.1.1
1.1.2
1.1.3Milestone ScheduleData DateData DateDetailed Schedule1.1.1.T
1.1
1.1.1
1.1.1.D
1.1.1.B
1.1.2.T
1.1.1.M1
1.1.2
1.1.2.D
1.1.2.B
1.1.3.M1
1.1.2.M1
1.1.3
1.1.3.G
1.1.3.TData DateSSFS1.1.3.P
1.1.3.MFSummary Schedule
Begin New Product Z
 Develop and Deliver Product Z
  Work Package 1: Component 1
  Design Component 1
  Build Component 1
  Test Component 1
  Complete Component 1
 Work Package 2: Component 2
  Design Component 2
  Build Component 2
  Test Component 2
  Complete Component 2
 Work Package 3: Integrated Components 1 and 2
  Integrate Components 1 and 2 as Product Z
  Complete Integration of Components 1 and 2
  Test Integrated Components as Product Z
  Deliver Product Z
Finish New Product Z
Figure 6-21. Project Schedule Presentations ŠExamples
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.184©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENTFigure 6-21 shows schedule presentations for a sample project being executed, with the work in progress 
reported through the data date, a point in time when the status of the project is recorded, which is sometimes 

also called the as-of date or status date. For a simple project schedule model, Figure 6-21 re˚ects schedule 

presentations in the forms of (1) a milestone schedule as a milestone chart, (2) a summary schedule as a bar 

chart, and (3) a detailed schedule as a project schedule network diagram. Figure 6-21 also visually shows the 

relationships among the three different levels of schedule presentation.
6.6.3.3 Schedule DataThe schedule data for the project schedule model is the collection of information for describing and controlling 
the schedule. The schedule data includes at least the schedule milestones, schedule activities, activity attributes, 

and documentation of all identi˜ed assumptions and constraints. The amount of additional data varies by application 

area. Information frequently supplied as supporting detail includes, but is not limited to:
Resource requirements by time period, often in the form of a resource histogram;
 Alternative schedules, such as best-case or worst-case, not resource-leveled, or resource-leveled, with 

or without imposed dates; and
Scheduling of contingency reserves.
Schedule data could also include such items as resource histograms, cash-˚ow projections, and order and 
delivery schedules.
6.6.3.4 Project CalendarsA project calendar identi˜es working days and shifts that are available for scheduled activities. It distinguishes 
time periods in days or parts of days that are available to complete scheduled activities from time periods that 

are not available. A schedule model may require more than one project calendar to allow for different work 

periods for some activities to calculate the project schedule. The project calendars may be updated.
6.6.3.5 Project Management Plan UpdatesElements of the project management plan that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Schedule baseline (Section 6.6.3.1),Schedule management plan (Section 6.1.3.1).
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.185©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.6.3.6 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
 Activity resource requirements. 
Resource leveling can have a signi˜cant effect on preliminary estimates 
for the types and quantities of resources required. If the resource-leveling analysis changes the project 

resource requirements, then the project resource requirements are updated.
 Activity attributes.
 Activity attributes (Section 6.2.3.2) are updated to include any revised resource 

requirements and any other revisions generated by the Develop Schedule process.
 Calendars. The calendar for each project may consist of multiple calendars, project calendars, individual 
resource calendars etc., as the basis for scheduling the project.
 Risk register.
 The risk register may need to be updated to re˚ect opportunities or threats perceived 
through scheduling assumptions.6.7 Control ScheduleControl Schedule is the process of monitoring the status of project activities to update project progress and 
manage changes to the schedule baseline to achieve the plan. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides 

the means to recognize deviation from the plan and take corrective and preventive actions and thus minimize 

risk. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 6-22. Figure 6-23 

depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Project schedule
.3 Work performance data
.4 Project calendars
.5 Schedule data
.6 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Performance reviews
.2 Project management  
 software
.3 Resource optimization  
 techniques
.4 Modeling techniques
.5 Leads and lags
.6 Schedule compression
.7 Scheduling tool
.1 Work performance  
 information
.2 Schedule forecasts
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan  
 updates
.5 Project documents  

 updates
.6 Organizational process  

 assets updates
Figure 6-22. 
Control Schedule: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.186©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT ProjectDocuments4.4Monitor andControl ProjectWork
4.5Perform
IntegratedChange ControlProject Time Management
6.7ControlSchedule6.6DevelopScheduleWo
dataProject

O

O


WinformationProject


PP
CProject


4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan4.3Direct andManage ProjectWork
Enterprise/
OrganizationFigure 6-23. 
Control Schedule Data Flow DiagramUpdating the schedule model requires knowing the actual performance to date. Any change to the schedule 
baseline can only be approved through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5). Control 

Schedule, as a component of the Perform Integrated Change Control process, is concerned with:
Determining the current status of the project schedule,
In˚uencing the factors that create schedule changes,
Determining if the project schedule has changed, and
Managing the actual changes as they occur.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.187©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6If any agile approach is utilized, control schedule is concerned with:
 Determining the current status of the project schedule by comparing the total amount of work delivered 

and accepted against the estimates of work completed for the elapsed time cycle,
 Conducting retrospective reviews (scheduled reviews to record lessons learned) for correcting processes 
and improving, if required,
Reprioritizing the remaining work plan (backlog), Determining the rate at which the deliverables are produced, validated, and accepted (velocity) in given 

time per iteration (agreed work cycle duration, typically two weeks or one month),
Determining that the project schedule has changed, and
Managing the actual changes as they occur.
6.7.1 Control Schedule: Inputs6.7.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan contains the schedule management plan and the 
schedule baseline. The schedule management plan describes how the schedule will be managed and controlled. 

The schedule baseline is used as a reference to compare with actual results to determine if a change, corrective 

action, or preventive action is necessary.
6.7.1.2 Project ScheduleDescribed in Section 6.6.3.2. Project schedule refers to the most recent version with notations to indicate 
updates, completed activities, and started activities as of the indicated data date.
6.7.1.3 Work Performance 
DataDescribed in Section 4.3.3.2. Work performance data refers to information about project progress such as which 
activities have started, their progress (e.g., actual duration, remaining duration, and physical percent complete), 

and which activities have ˜nished.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.188©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.7.1.4 Project CalendarsDescribed in Section 6.6.3.4. A schedule model may require more than one project calendar to allow for 
different work periods for some activities to calculate the schedule forecasts.
6.7.1.5 Schedule DataDescribed in Section 6.6.3.3. Schedule data will be reviewed and updated in the Control Schedule process.
6.7.1.6 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that in˚uence the Control Schedule process 
include, but are not limited to:
Existing formal and informal schedule control-related policies, procedures, and guidelines;
Schedule control tools; andMonitoring and reporting methods to be used.6.7.2 Control Schedule: Tools and Techniques6.7.2.1 Performance 
ReviewsPerformance reviews measure, compare, and analyze schedule performance such as actual start and 
˜nish dates, percent complete, and remaining duration for work in progress. Various techniques may be used,  
among them: Trend analysis.
 Trend analysis examines project performance over time to determine whether 
performance is improving or deteriorating. Graphical analysis techniques are valuable for understanding 

performance to date and for comparison to future performance goals in the form of completion dates.
 C
ritical path method (Section 6.6.2.2).
 Comparing the progress along the critical path can help 
determine schedule status. The variance on the critical path will have a direct impact on the project end 

date. Evaluating the progress of activities on near critical paths can identify schedule risk.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.189©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6 C
ritical chain method (Section 6.6.2.3). Comparing the amount of buffer remaining to the amount of buffer needed to protect the delivery date can help determine schedule status. The difference between 

the buffer needed and the buffer remaining can determine whether corrective action is appropriate.
 Earned value management (Section 7.4.2.1).
 Schedule performance measurements such as schedule 
variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI), are used to assess the magnitude of variation to the 

original schedule baseline. The total ˚oat and early ˜nish variances are also essential planning components 

to evaluate project time performance. Important aspects of schedule control include determining the cause 

and degree of variance relative to the schedule baseline (Section 6.6.3.1), estimating the implications 

of those variances for future work to completion, and deciding whether corrective or preventive action 

is required. For example, a major delay on any activity not on the critical path may have little effect on 

the overall project schedule, while a much shorter delay on a critical or near-critical activity may require 

immediate action. For projects not using earned value management, similar variance analysis can be 

performed by comparing planned activity start or ˜nish dates against actual start or ˜nish dates to 

identify variances between the schedule baseline and actual project performance. Further analysis can 

be performed to determine the cause and degree of variance relative to the schedule baseline and any 

corrective or preventative actions needed.
6.7.2.2 Project Management SoftwareProject management software for scheduling provides the ability to track planned dates versus actual dates, 
to report variances to and progress made against the schedule baseline, and to forecast the effects of changes 

to the project schedule model.6.7.2.3 Resource Optimization TechniquesDescribed in Section 6.6.2.4. Resource optimization techniques involve the scheduling of activities and the 
resources required by those activities while taking into consideration both the resource availability and the project 

time.6.7.2.4 Modeling TechniquesDescribed in Section 6.6.2.5. Modeling techniques are used to review various scenarios guided by risk monitoring 
to bring the schedule model into alignment with the project management plan and approved baseline.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.190©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.7.2.5 Leads and LagsAdjusting leads and lags is applied during network analysis to ˜nd ways to bring project activities that are 
behind into alignment with the plan. For example, on a project to construct a new of˜ce building, the landscaping 

can be adjusted to start before the exterior work of the building is complete by increasing the lead time in the 
relationship. Or, a technical writing team can adjust the start of editing the draft of a large document immediately 

after the document is completed by eliminating or decreasing lag time.
6.7.2.6 Schedule CompressionDescribed in Section 6.6.2.7. Schedule compression techniques are used to ˜nd ways to bring project activities 
that are behind into alignment with the plan by fast tracking or crashing schedule for the remaining work.
6.7.2.7 Scheduling ToolSchedule data is updated and compiled into the schedule model to re˚ect actual progress of the project and 
remaining work to be completed. The scheduling tool (Section 6.6.2.8) and the supporting schedule data are used 

in conjunction with manual methods or other project management software to perform schedule network analysis 

to generate an updated project schedule.
6.7.3 Control Schedule: Outputs6.7.3.1 Work Performance Information
The calculated SV and SPI time performance indicators for WBS components, in particular the work packages 
and control accounts, are documented and communicated to stakeholders.
6.7.3.2 Schedule ForecastsSchedule forecasts are estimates or predictions of conditions and events in the project™s future based on 
information and knowledge available at the time of the forecast. Forecasts are updated and reissued based on 

work performance information provided as the project is executed. The information is based on the project™s past 

performance and expected future performance, and includes earned value performance indicators that could 

impact the project in the future.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.191©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT66.7.3.3 Change RequestsSchedule variance analysis, along with review of progress reports, results of performance measures, and 
modi˜cations to the project scope or project schedule may result in change requests to the schedule baseline, 

scope baseline, and/or other components of the project management plan. Change requests are processed for 

review and disposition through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5). Preventive actions 

may include recommended changes to eliminate or reduce the probability of negative schedule variances.
6.7.3.4 Project Management Plan UpdatesElements of the project management plan that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
 Schedule baseline. 
Changes to the schedule baseline are incorporated in response to approved change 

requests (Section 4.4.3.1) related to project scope changes, activity resources, or activity duration 

estimates. The schedule baseline may be updated to re˚ect changes caused by schedule compression 

techniques. Schedule management plan. The schedule management plan may be updated to re˚ect a change in 

the way the schedule is managed.
 Cost baseline. 
The cost baseline may be updated to re˚ect approved change requests or changes caused 
by compression techniques.6.7.3.5 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
 Schedule Data. 
New project schedule network diagrams may be developed to display approved remaining 
durations and approved modi˜cations to the schedule. In some cases, project schedule delays can be 

so severe that development of a new target schedule with forecasted start and ˜nish dates is needed to 

provide realistic data for directing the work, measuring performance, and measuring progress.
 Project Schedule. An updated project schedule will be generated from the schedule model populated 

with updated schedule data to re˚ect the schedule changes and manage the project.
 Risk Register.
 The risk register, and risk response plans within it, may also be updated based on the risks 
that may arise due to schedule compression techniques.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.192©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
6 - PROJECT TIME MANAGEMENT6.7.3.6 Organizational Process Assets UpdatesOrganizational process assets that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Causes of variances,Corrective action chosen and the reasons, and
Other types of lessons learned from project schedule control.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.193©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTProject Cost Management includes the processes involved in planning, estimating, budgeting, ˜nancing, funding, 
managing, and controlling costs so that the project can be completed within the approved budget.
Figure 7-1 provides an overview of the following Project Cost Management processes:
7.1  Plan Cost ManagementŠThe process that establishes the policies, procedures, and documentation 
for planning, managing, expending, and controlling project costs.
7.2  Estimate CostsŠThe process of developing an approximation of the monetary resources needed to 
complete project activities.7.3  Determine Budget
ŠThe process of aggregating the estimated costs of individual activities or work 
packages to establish an authorized cost baseline.
7.4  Control CostsŠThe process of monitoring the status of the project to update the project costs and 
managing changes to the cost baseline.
These processes interact with each other and with processes in other Knowledge Areas as described in 
detail in Section 3 and Annex A1.
On some projects, especially those of smaller scope, cost estimating and cost budgeting are tightly linked 
and can be viewed as a single process that can be performed by a single person over a relatively short period 

of time. These are presented here as distinct processes because the tools and techniques for each are different. 

The ability to in˚uence cost is greatest at the early stages of the project, making early scope de˜nition critical 

(Section 5.3).77Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.194©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT.1 Inputs
 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Project charter
 .3 Enterprise environmental  
  factors
 .4 Organizational process assets
2. Tools & Techniques
 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Analytical techniques
 .3 Meetings
 .3 Outputs
  .1 Cost management plan
.1 Inputs

 .1 Cost management plan
 .2 Human resource management  
  plan

 .3 Scope baseline
 .4 Project schedule
 .5 Risk register
 .6 Enterprise environmental  
  factors

 .7 Organizational process assets
2. Tools & Techniques

 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Analogous estimating
 .3 Parametric estimating
 .4 Bottom-up estimating
 .5 Three-point estimating
 .6 Reserve analysis
 .7 Cost of quality
 .8 Project management software
 .9 Vendor bid analysis

    .10 Group decision-making  

  techniques
 .3 Outputs
 .1 Activity cost estimates
 .2 Basis of estimates
 .3 Project documents updates
.1 Inputs

 .1 Cost management plan
 .2 Scope baseline
 .3 Activity cost estimates
 .4 Basis of estimates
 .5 Project schedule
 .6 Resource calendars
 .7 Risk register 
 .8 Agreements
 .9 Organizational process assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Cost aggregation
 .2 Reserve analysis
 .3 Expert judgment
 .4 Historical relationships
 .5 Funding limit reconciliation
 .3 Outputs
 .1 Cost baseline
 .2 Project funding requirements
 .3 Project documents updates
 .1 Inputs

 .1 Project management plan
 .2 Project funding requirements
 .3 Work performance data

 .4 Organizational process assets
.2 Tools & Techniques

 .1 Earned value management
 .2 Forecasting
 .3 To-complete performance  

  index (TCPI)

 .4 Performance reviews
 .5 Project management software
 .6 Reserve analysis
.3 Outputs

 .1 Work performance   

  information

 .2 Cost forecasts
 .3 Change requests
 .4 Project management plan  
  updates

 .5 Project documents updates
 .6 Organizational process assets  
  updates
Project Cost ManagementOverview7.2 Estimate Costs
7.1 Plan Cost
Management7.3 Determine Budget
7.4 Control Costs
Figure 7-1. Project 
Cost Management Overview
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.195©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Project Cost Management should consider the stakeholder requirements for managing costs. Different 
stakeholders will measure project costs in different ways and at different times. For example, the cost of an 

acquired item may be measured when the acquisition decision is made or committed, the order is placed, the item 

is delivered, or the actual cost is incurred or recorded for project accounting purposes.
Project Cost Management is primarily concerned with the cost of the resources needed to complete project 
activities. Project Cost Management should also consider the effect of project decisions on the subsequent recurring 

cost of using, maintaining, and supporting the product, service, or result of the project. For example, limiting the 

number of design reviews can reduce the cost of the project but could increase the resulting product™s operating 

costs.In many organizations, predicting and analyzing the prospective ˜nancial performance of the project™s product is 
performed outside of the project. In others, such as a capital facilities project, Project Cost Management can include 

this work. When such predictions and analyses are included, Project Cost Management may address additional 

processes and numerous general ˜nancial management techniques such as return on investment, discounted cash 

˚ow, and investment payback analysis.
The cost management planning effort occurs early in project planning and sets the framework for each of the 
cost management processes so that performance of the processes will be ef˜cient and coordinated.
7.1 Plan Cost ManagementPlan Cost Management is the process that establishes the policies, procedures, and documentation for planning, 
managing, expending, and controlling project costs. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides guidance and 

direction on how the project costs will be managed throughout the project. The inputs, tools and techniques, and 

outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 7-2. Figure 7-3 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Project charter
.3 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Expert judgment
.2 Analytical techniques
.3 Meetings
.1 Cost management plan
Figure 7-2. Plan 
Cost Management: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.196©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT Project Cost Management7.1Plan Cost Management6.2DefineActivities6.3SequenceActivities
Project




O




4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan11.2IdentifyRisks11.4Perform
QuantitativeRisk Analysis4.1 Develop ProjectCharter
Enterprise/
OrganizationFigure 7-3. Plan 
Cost Management: Data Flow DiagramThe cost management processes and their associated tools and techniques are documented in the cost 
management plan. The cost management plan is a component of the project management plan.
7.1.1 Plan Cost Management: Inputs7.1.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan contains information used to develop the cost 
management plan, which contains, but is not limited to:
 Scope baseline. 
The scope baseline includes the project scope statement and WBS detail for cost 
estimation and management.
Schedule baseline. The schedule baseline de˜nes when the project costs will be incurred.
 Other information. 
Other cost-related scheduling, risk, and communications decisions from the project 
management plan.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.197©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.1.1.2 Project CharterDescribed in Section 4.1.3.1. The project charter provides the summary budget from which the detailed project 
costs are developed. The project charter also de˜nes the project approval requirements that will in˚uence the 

management of the project costs.
7.1.1.3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that in˚uence the Plan Cost Management 
process include, but are not limited to:
Organizational culture and structure can all in˚uence cost management;
 Market conditions describe what products, services, and results are available in the regional and global 

market;Currency exchange rates for project costs sourced from more than one country;
 Published commercial information such as resource cost rate information is often available from 

commercial databases that track skills and human resource costs, and provide standard costs for material 

and equipment. Published seller price lists are another source of information; and
Project management information system, which provides alternative possibilities for managing cost.
7.1.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that in˚uence the Plan Cost Management process 
include, but are not limited to:
 Financial controls procedures (e.g., time reporting, required expenditure and disbursement reviews, 

accounting codes, and standard contract provisions);
Historical information and lessons learned knowledge bases;
Financial databases; and
Existing formal and informal cost estimating and budgeting-related policies, procedures, and guidelines.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.198©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7.1.2 Plan Cost Management: Tools and Techniques7.1.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment, guided by historical information, provides valuable insight about the environment and 
information from prior similar projects. Expert judgment can also suggest whether to combine methods and how to 

reconcile differences between them. 
Judgment based upon expertise in an application area, Knowledge Area, discipline, industry, etc., as appropriate 
for the activity being performed should be used in developing the cost management plan.
7.1.2.2 Analytical TechniquesDeveloping the cost management plan may involve choosing strategic options to fund the project such as: 
self-funding, funding with equity, or funding with debt. The cost management plan may also detail ways to ˜nance 

project resources such as making, purchasing, renting, or leasing. These decisions, like other ˜nancial decisions 

affecting the project, may affect project schedule and/or risks.
Organizational policies and procedures may in˚uence which ˜nancial techniques are employed in these 
decisions. Techniques may include (but are not limited to): payback period, return on investment, internal rate of 

return, discounted cash ˚ow, and net present value.
7.1.2.3 MeetingsProject teams may hold planning meetings to develop the cost management plan. Attendees at these meetings 
may include the project manager, the project sponsor, selected project team members, selected stakeholders, 

anyone with responsibility for project costs, and others as needed.
7.1.3 Plan Cost Management: Outputs7.1.3.1 Cost Management PlanThe cost management plan is a component of the project management plan and describes how the project 
costs will be planned, structured, and controlled. The cost management processes and their associated tools and 

techniques are documented in the cost management plan.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.199©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7For example, the cost management plan can establish the following:
 U
nits of measure. 
Each unit used in measurements (such as staff hours, staff days, weeks for time 
measures; or meters, liters, tons, kilometers, or cubic yards for quantity measures; or lump sum in 

currency form) is de˜ned for each of the resources.
 Level of precision. 
The degree to which activity cost estimates will be rounded up or down (e.g., 

US$100.49 to US$100, or US$995.59 to US$1,000), based on the scope of the activities and magnitude 

of the project. Level of accuracy. 
The acceptable range (e.g., ±10%) used in determining realistic activity cost estimates 

is speci˜ed, and may include an amount for contingencies;
 Organizational procedures links. 
The work breakdown structure (WBS) (Section 5.4) provides the 
framework for the cost management plan, allowing for consistency with the estimates, budgets, and 

control of costs. The WBS component used for the project cost accounting is called the control account. 

Each control account is assigned a unique code or account number(s) that links directly to the performing 

organization™s accounting system.
 Control thresholds. 
Variance thresholds for monitoring cost performance may be speci˜ed to indicate 
an agreed-upon amount of variation to be allowed before some action needs to be taken. Thresholds are 

typically expressed as percentage deviations from the baseline plan.
 Rules of performance measurement. Earned value management (EVM) rules of performance 
measurement are set. For example, the cost management plan may:
 ˜Define the points in the WBS at which measurement of control accounts will be performed;
 ˜ Establish the earned value measurement techniques (e.g., weighted milestones, fixed-formula, 

percent complete, etc.) to be employed; and
 ˜ Specify tracking methodologies and the earned value management computation equations for 

calculating projected estimate at completion (EAC) forecasts to provide a validity check on the 

bottom-up EAC.For more speci˜c information regarding earned value management, refer to the 
Practice Standard for 
Earned Value Management Œ Second Edition.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.200©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTReporting formats. 
The formats and frequency for the various cost reports are de˜ned.
Process descriptions. 
Descriptions of each of the other cost management processes are documented.
Additional details. 
Additional details about cost management activities include, but are not limited to:
 ˜Description of strategic funding choices,
 ˜Procedure to account for fluctuations in currency exchange rates, and
 ˜Procedure for project cost recording.7.2 Estimate CostsEstimate Costs is the process of developing an approximation of the monetary resources needed to complete 
project activities. The key bene˜t of this process is that it determines the amount of cost required to complete 

project work. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are depicted in Figure 7-4. Figure 7-5 

depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Cost management plan
.2 Human resource  
 management plan
.3 Scope baseline
.4 Project schedule
.5 Risk register
.6 Enterprise environmental  
 factors
.7 Organizational process  
 assets
 .1 Expert judgment
 .2 Analogous estimating
 .3 Parametric estimating
 .4 Bottom-up estimating
 .5 Three-point estimating
 .6 Reserve analysis
 .7 Cost of quality
 .8 Project management  
  software
 .9 Vendor bid analysis
.10 Group decision-making  
  techniques
.1 Activity cost estimates
.2 Basis of estimates
.3 Project documents  
 updatesFigure 7-4. Estimate 
Costs: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.201©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Project Cost Management7.2
EstimateCosts
7.3
Determine
BudgetCost
planP
sAestimates
estimatesProject
Documents
Rr
e

eP
nvironmental
sOrganizational
11.2
IdentifyRisks9.1
Plan Human
Resource 
Management5.4Create
WBS
6.6Develop
ScheduleEnterprise/
Organization11.2
IdentifyRisks6.4Estimate Activity
Resources
12.1
Plan Procurement
Management7.1
Plan CostManagementFigure 7-5. Estimate 
Costs Data Flow DiagramCost estimates are a prediction that is based on the information known at a given point in time. Cost estimates 
include the identi˜cation and consideration of costing alternatives to initiate and complete the project. Cost trade-

offs and risks should be considered, such as make versus buy, buy versus lease, and the sharing of resources in 

order to achieve optimal costs for the project.Cost estimates are generally expressed in units of some currency (i.e., dollars, euros, yen, etc.), although in 
some instances other units of measure, such as staff hours or staff days, are used to facilitate comparisons by 

eliminating the effects of currency ˚uctuations.
Cost estimates should be reviewed and re˜ned during the course of the project to re˚ect additional detail 
as it becomes available and assumptions are tested. The accuracy of a project estimate will increase as the 

project progresses through the project life cycle. For example, a project in the initiation phase may have a rough 

order of magnitude (ROM) estimate in the range of ˛25% to +75%. Later in the project, as more information is 

known, de˜nitive estimates could narrow the range of accuracy to -5% to +10%. In some organizations, there are 

guidelines for when such re˜nements can be made and the degree of con˜dence or accuracy that is expected.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.202©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTSources of input information are derived from the outputs of processes in other Knowledge Areas. Once received, 
all of this information will remain available as inputs to all of the cost management processes.
Costs are estimated for all resources that will be charged to the project. This includes, but is not limited to, labor, 
materials, equipment, services, and facilities, as well as special categories such as an in˚ation allowance, cost 

of ˜nancing, or contingency costs. A cost estimate is a quantitative assessment of the likely costs for resources 

required to complete the activity. Cost estimates may be presented at the activity level or in summary form.
7.2.1 Estimate Costs: Inputs7.2.1.1 Cost Management PlanDescribed in Section 7.1.3.1. The cost management plan de˜nes how project costs will be managed and 
controlled. It includes the method used and the level of accuracy required to estimate activity cost.
7.2.1.2 Human Resource Management PlanDescribed in Section 9.1.3.1. The human resource management plan provides project staf˜ng attributes, 
personnel rates, and related rewards/recognition, which are necessary components for developing the project cost 

estimates.
7.2.1.3 Scope BaselineThe scope baseline is comprised of the following:
 Project scope statement.
 The project scope statement (Section 5.3.3.1) provides the product description, 

acceptance criteria, key deliverables, project boundaries, assumptions, and constraints about the project. 

One basic assumption that needs to be made when estimating project costs is whether the estimates will 

be limited to direct project costs only or whether the estimates will also include indirect costs. Indirect 

costs are those costs that cannot be directly traced to a speci˜c project and therefore will be accumulated 

and allocated equitably over multiple projects by some approved and documented accounting procedure. 

One of the most common constraints for many projects is a limited project budget. Examples of other 

constraints are required delivery dates, available skilled resources, and organizational policies.
 Work breakdown structure. 
The WBS (Section 5.4) provides the relationships among all the components 
of the project and the project deliverables. WBS dictionary. 
The WBS dictionary (Section 5.4.3.1) provides detailed information about the deliverables 
and a description of the work for each component in the WBS required to produce each deliverable.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.203©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Additional information that may be found in the scope baseline with contractual and legal implications, such as 
health, safety, security, performance, environmental, insurance, intellectual property rights, licenses, and permits. 

All of this information should be considered when developing the cost estimates.
7.2.1.4 Project ScheduleDescribed in Section 6.6.3.2. The type and quantity of resources and the amount of time which those resources 
are applied to complete the work of the project are major factors in determining the project cost. Schedule activity 

resources and their respective durations are used as key inputs to this process. Estimate Activity Resources (Section 

6.4) involves determining the availability of staff, the number of staff hours required, and quantities of material and 

equipment needed to perform schedule activities. It is closely coordinated with cost estimating. Activity duration 

estimates (Section 6.5.3.1) will affect cost estimates on any project where the project budget includes an allowance 

for the cost of ˜nancing (including interest charges) and where resources are applied per unit of time for the 

duration of the activity. Activity duration estimates can also affect cost estimates that have time-sensitive costs 

included in them, such as union labor with regularly expiring collective bargaining agreements or materials with 

seasonal cost variations.
7.2.1.5 Risk RegisterDescribed in Section 11.2.3.1. The risk register should be reviewed to consider risk response costs. Risks, 
which can be either threats or opportunities, typically have an impact on both activity and overall project costs. As 

a general rule, when the project experiences a negative risk event, the near-term cost of the project will usually 

increase, and there will sometimes be a delay in the project schedule. In a similar way, the project team should 

be sensitive to potential opportunities that can bene˜t the business either by directly reducing activity costs or by 

accelerating the schedule.
7.2.1.6 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Described in Section 2.1.5. The enterprise environmental factors that in˚uence the Estimate Costs process 
include, but are not limited to:
 Market conditions. These conditions describe what products, services, and results are available in the 

market, from whom, and under what terms and conditions. Regional and/or global supply and demand 

conditions greatly in˚uence resource costs.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.204©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT Published commercial information. 
Resource cost rate information is often available from commercial 
databases that track skills and human resource costs, and provide standard costs for material and 

equipment. Published seller price lists are another source of information.
7.2.1.7 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that in˚uence the Estimate Costs process include, 
but are not limited to:Cost estimating policies,
Cost estimating templates,
Historical information, and
Lessons learned.7.2.2 Estimate Costs: Tools and Techniques7.2.2.1 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment, guided by historical information, provides valuable insight about the environment and 
information from prior similar projects. Expert judgment can also be used to determine whether to combine methods 

of estimating and how to reconcile differences between them.
7.2.2.2 Analogous EstimatingAnalogous cost estimating uses the values such as scope, cost, budget, and duration or measures of scale such 
as size, weight, and complexity from a previous, similar project as the basis for estimating the same parameter 

or measurement for a current project. When estimating costs, this technique relies on the actual cost of previous, 

similar projects as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project. It is a gross value estimating approach, 

sometimes adjusted for known differences in project complexity.
Analogous cost estimating is frequently used to estimate a value when there is a limited amount of detailed 
information about the project, for example, in the early phases of a project. Analogous cost estimating uses 

historical information and expert judgment.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.205©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Analogous cost estimating is generally less costly and less time consuming than other techniques, but it is also 
generally less accurate. Analogous cost estimates can be applied to a total project or to segments of a project, in 

conjunction with other estimating methods. Analogous estimating is most reliable when the previous projects are 

similar in fact and not just in appearance, and the project team members preparing the estimates have the needed 

expertise.7.2.2.3 Parametric Estimating
Parametric estimating uses a statistical relationship between relevant historical data and other variables (e.g., 
square footage in construction) to calculate a cost estimate for project work. This technique can produce higher 

levels of accuracy depending upon the sophistication and underlying data built into the model. Parametric cost 

estimates can be applied to a total project or to segments of a project, in conjunction with other estimating methods.
7.2.2.4 Bottom-Up EstimatingBottom-up estimating is a method of estimating a component of work. The cost of individual work packages or 
activities is estimated to the greatest level of speci˜ed detail. The detailed cost is then summarized or ﬁrolled upﬂ to 

higher levels for subsequent reporting and tracking purposes. The cost and accuracy of bottom-up cost estimating 

are typically in˚uenced by the size and complexity of the individual activity or work package.
7.2.2.5 Three-Point Estimating
The accuracy of single-point activity cost estimates may be improved by considering estimation uncertainty and 
risk and using three estimates to de˜ne an approximate range for an activity™s cost:
 Most likely (cM). The cost of the activity, based on realistic effort assessment for the required work and 

any predicted expenses.
Optimistic (cO). The activity cost based on analysis of the best-case scenario for the activity.
Pessimistic
 (cP). The activity cost based on analysis of the worst-case scenario for the activity.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.206©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTDepending on the assumed distribution of values within the range of the three estimates the expected cost, cE, 
can be calculated using a formula. Two commonly used formulas are triangular and beta distributions. The formulas 

are:Triangular Distribution. cE = (cO + cM + cP) / 3Beta Distribution (from a traditional PERT analysis). cE = (cO + 4cM + cP) / 6
Cost estimates based on three points with an assumed distribution provide an expected cost and clarify the 
range of uncertainty around the expected cost.7.2.2.6 Reserve Analysis
Cost estimates may include contingency reserves (sometimes called contingency allowances) to account for 
cost uncertainty. Contingency reserves are the budget within the cost baseline that is allocated for identi˜ed risks, 

which are accepted and for which contingent or mitigating responses are developed. Contingency reserves are 

often viewed as the part of the budget intended to address the ﬁknown-unknownsﬂ that can affect a project. For 

example, rework for some project deliverables could be anticipated, while the amount of this rework is unknown. 

Contingency reserves may be estimated to account for this unknown amount of rework. Contingency reserves can 

provide for a speci˜c activity, for the whole project, or both. The contingency reserve may be a percentage of the 

estimated cost, a ˜xed number, or may be developed by using quantitative analysis methods.
As more precise information about the project becomes available, the contingency reserve may be used, 
reduced, or eliminated. Contingency should be clearly identi˜ed in cost documentation. Contingency reserves are 

part of the cost baseline and the overall funding requirements for the project.Estimates may also be produced for the amount of management reserve to be funded for the project. 
Management reserves are an amount of the project budget withheld for management control purposes and are 

reserved for unforeseen work that is within scope of the project. Management reserves are intended to address the 

ﬁunknown unknownsﬂ that can affect a project. The management reserve is not included in the cost baseline but 

is part of the overall project budget and funding requirements. When an amount of management reserves is used 

to fund unforeseen work, the amount of management reserve used is added to the cost baseline, thus requiring an 

approved change to the cost baseline.
7.2.2.7 Cost of Quality (COQ)Assumptions about costs of quality (Section 8.1.2.2) may be used to prepare the activity cost estimate.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.207©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.2.2.8 Project Management SoftwareProject management software applications, computerized spreadsheets, simulation, and statistical tools are 
used to assist with cost estimating. Such tools can simplify the use of some cost-estimating techniques and thereby 

facilitate rapid consideration of cost estimate alternatives.
7.2.2.9 Vendor Bid Analysis
Cost estimating methods may include analysis of what the project should cost, based on the responsive bids from 
quali˜ed vendors. When projects are awarded to a vendor under competitive processes, additional cost estimating 

work may be required of the project team to examine the price of individual deliverables and to derive a cost that 

supports the ˜nal total project cost.7.2.2.10 Group Decision-Making TechniquesTeam-based approaches, such as brainstorming, the Delphi or nominal group techniques, are useful for engaging 
team members to improve estimate accuracy and commitment to the emerging estimates. By involving a structured 

group of people who are close to the technical execution of work in the estimation process, additional information is 

gained and more accurate estimates are obtained. Additionally, when people are involved in the estimation process, 

their commitment towards meeting the resulting estimates increases.
7.2.3 Estimate Costs: Outputs7.2.3.1 Activity Cost EstimatesActivity cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable costs required to complete project 
work. Cost estimates can be presented in summary form or in detail. Costs are estimated for all resources that 

are applied to the activity cost estimate. This includes, but is not limited to, direct labor, materials, equipment, 

services, facilities, information technology, and special categories such as cost of ˜nancing (including interest 

charges), an in˚ation allowance, exchange rates, or a cost contingency reserve. Indirect costs, if they are included 

in the project estimate, can be included at the activity level or at higher levels.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.208©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7.2.3.2 Basis of EstimatesThe amount and type of additional details supporting the cost estimate vary by application area. Regardless of 
the level of detail, the supporting documentation should provide a clear and complete understanding of how the 

cost estimate was derived.
Supporting detail for activity cost estimates may include:
Documentation of the basis of the estimate (i.e., how it was developed),
Documentation of all assumptions made,
Documentation of any known constraints,
 Indication of the range of possible estimates (e.g., 
˜10,000 (±10%) to indicate that the item is expected 

to cost between a range of values), and
Indication of the con˜dence level of the ˜nal estimate.
7.2.3.3 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to, the risk register.
7.3 Determine BudgetDetermine Budget is the process of aggregating the estimated costs of individual activities or work packages to 
establish an authorized cost baseline. The key bene˜t of this process is that it determines the cost baseline against 

which project performance can be monitored and controlled. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this 

process are depicted in Figure 7-6. Figure 7-7 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Cost management plan
.2 Scope baseline
.3 Activity cost estimates
.4 Basis of estimates
.5 Project schedule
.6 Resource calendars
.7 Risk register 
.8 Agreements
.9 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Cost aggregation
.2 Reserve analysis
.3 Expert judgment
.4 Historical relationships
.5 Funding limit   
 reconciliation.1 Cost baseline
.2 Project funding   
 requirements
.3 Project documents  

 updatesFigure 7-6. 
Determine Budget: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.209©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Project Cost Management7.3Determine
Budget7.4ControlCostsCost
planAsP
s
P

sProjectDocumentsRrAgreementsOrganizational

s
eP
e
s11.2IdentifyRisks12.2ConductProcurements9.2Acquire ProjectTeam
5.4CreateWBS6.6DevelopScheduleEnterprise/
Organization4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlan7.1Plan CostManagement7.2EstimateCostsFigure 7-7. 
Determine Budget Data Flow DiagramA project budget includes all the funds authorized to execute the project. The cost baseline is the approved 
version of the time-phased project budget, but excludes management reserves.
7.3.1 Determine Budget: Inputs7.3.1.1 Cost Management PlanDescribed in Section 7.1.3.1. The cost management plan describes how the project costs will be managed and 
controlled.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.210©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7.3.1.2 Scope Baseline Project scope statement. Formal limitations by period for the expenditure of project funds can be 

mandated by the organization, by agreement (Section 12.2.3.2), or by other entities such as government 

agencies. These funding constraints are re˚ected in the project scope statement.
 Work breakdown structure. 
The WBS (Section 5.4) provides the relationships among all the project 

deliverables and their various components. WBS dictionary. 
The WBS dictionary (Section 5.4.3.1) and related detailed statements of work provide 
an identi˜cation of the deliverables and a description of the work in each WBS component required to 

produce each deliverable.7.3.1.3 Activity Cost EstimatesDescribed in Section 7.2.3.1. Cost estimates for each activity within a work package are aggregated to obtain a 
cost estimate for each work package.
7.3.1.4 Basis of EstimatesDescribed in Section 7.2.3.2. Supporting detail for cost estimates contained in the basis for estimates should 
specify any basic assumptions dealing with the inclusion or exclusion of indirect or other costs in the project budget.
7.3.1.5 Project ScheduleDescribed in Section 6.6.3.2. The project schedule includes planned start and ˜nish dates for the project™s 
activities, milestones, work packages, and control accounts. This information can be used to aggregate costs to the 

calendar periods in which the costs are planned to be incurred.7.3.1.6 Resource CalendarsDescribed in Sections 9.2.3.2 and 12.2.3.3. Resource calendars provide information on which resources are 
assigned to the project and when they are assigned. This information can be used to indicate resource costs over 

the duration of the project.
7.3.1.7 Risk RegisterDescribed in Section 11.2.3.1. The risk register should be reviewed to consider how to aggregate the risk response 
costs. Updates to the risk register are included with project document updates described in Section
 11.5.3.2.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.211©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.3.1.8 AgreementsDescribed in Section 12.2.3.2. Applicable agreement information and costs relating to products, services, or 
results that have been or will be purchased are included when determining the budget.
7.3.1.9 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that in˚uence the Determine Budget process 
include, but are not limited to:
Existing formal and informal cost budgeting-related policies, procedures, and guidelines;
Cost budgeting tools; andReporting methods.7.3.2 Determine Budget: Tools and Techniques7.3.2.1 Cost AggregationCost estimates are aggregated by work packages in accordance with the WBS. The work package cost estimates 
are then aggregated for the higher component levels of the WBS (such as control accounts) and ultimately for the 

entire project.7.3.2.2 Reserve Analysis
Budget reserve analysis can establish both the contingency reserves and the management reserves for the 
project. Management and contingency reserves are addressed in more detail in Section 7.2.2.6.
7.3.2.3 Expert JudgmentExpert judgment, guided by experience in an application area, Knowledge Area, discipline, industry, or similar 
project, aids in determining the budget. Such expertise may be provided by any group or person with specialized 

education, knowledge, skill, experience, or training. Expert judgment is available from many sources, including, but 

not limited to:Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.212©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTOther units within the performing organization,
Consultants,Stakeholders, including customers,
Professional and technical associations, and
Industry groups.
7.3.2.4 Historical RelationshipsAny historical relationships that result in parametric estimates or analogous estimates involve the use of project 
characteristics (parameters) to develop mathematical models to predict total project costs. Such models may be 

simple (e.g., residential home construction is based on a certain cost per square foot of space) or complex (e.g., one 

model of software development costing uses multiple separate adjustment factors, each of which has numerous 

points within it).Both the cost and accuracy of analogous and parametric models can vary widely. They are most likely to be 
reliable when:Historical information used to develop the model is accurate,
Parameters used in the model are readily quanti˜able, and
Models are scalable, such that they work for large projects, small projects, and phases of a project.
7.3.2.5 Funding Limit ReconciliationThe expenditure of funds should be reconciled with any funding limits on the commitment of funds for the project. 
A variance between the funding limits and the planned expenditures will sometimes necessitate the rescheduling of 

work to level out the rate of expenditures. This is accomplished by placing imposed date constraints for work into 

the project schedule.7.3.3 Determine Budget: Outputs7.3.3.1 Cost BaselineThe cost baseline is the approved version of the time-phased project budget, excluding any management reserves, 
which can only be changed through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison to 
actual results. It is developed as a summation of the approved budgets for the different schedule activities.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.213©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7Figure 7-8 illustrates the various components of the project budget and cost baseline. Activity cost estimates 
for the various project activities along with any contingency reserves (Section 7.2.2.6) for these activities are 

aggregated into their associated work package costs. The work package cost estimates, along with any contingency 

reserves estimated for the work packages, are aggregated into control accounts. The summation of the control 

accounts make up the cost baseline. Since the cost estimates that make up the cost baseline are directly tied to the 

schedule activities, this enables a time-phased view of the cost baseline, which is typically displayed in the form of 

an S-curve, as is illustrated in Figure 7-9.
Management reserves (Section 7.2.2.6) are added to the cost baseline to produce the project budget. As changes 
warranting the use of management reserves arise, the change control process is used to obtain approval to move 

the applicable management reserve funds into the cost baseline.
Activity CostEstimatesActivityContingency Reserve
Work Package
Cost EstimatesContingency
Reserve
CostBaselineControlAccountsManagement
Reserve
ProjectBudget
Project Budget Component
Total Amount
Figure 7-8. Project Budget 
ComponentsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.214©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTBAC
Project BudgetManagement Reserve
Funding Requirements
Cost BaselineExpendituresTime
Cumulative Values
Figure 7-9. 
Cost Baseline, Expenditures, and Funding 
Requirements7.3.3.2 Project Funding RequirementsTotal funding requirements and periodic funding requirements (e.g., quarterly, annually) are derived from the 
cost baseline. The cost baseline will include projected expenditures plus anticipated liabilities. Funding often occurs 

in incremental amounts that are not continuous, and may not be evenly distributed, which appear as steps as 

shown in Figure 7-9. The total funds required are those included in the cost baseline, plus management reserves, 

if any. Funding requirements may include the source(s) of the funding.
7.3.3.3 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Risk register,
Activity cost estimates, and
Project schedule.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.215©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.4 Control CostsControl Costs is the process of monitoring the status of the project to update the project costs and managing 
changes to the cost baseline. The key bene˜t of this process is that it provides the means to recognize variance 

from the plan in order to take corrective action and minimize risk. The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of 

this process are depicted in Figure 7-10. Figure 7-11 depicts the data ˚ow diagram of the process.
Inputs
Tools & TechniquesOutputs.1 Project management plan
.2 Project funding   
 requirements
.3 Work performance data
.4 Organizational process  
 assets
.1 Earned value   
 management
.2 Forecasting
.3 To-complete   
 performance index (TCPI)
.4 Performance reviews
.5 Project management  
 software
.6 Reserve analysis
.1 Work performance  
 information
.2 Cost forecasts
.3 Change requests
.4 Project management plan  
 updates
.5 Project documents  

 updates
.6 Organizational process  

 assets updates
Figure 7-10. 
Control Costs: Inputs, 
Tools & Techniques, and 
OutputsProject Cost Management7.4ControlCostsP
sP
sC
W
Cost


sProjectDocumentsProject
t
Wo


4.3Direct andManage ProjectWork
4.2Develop ProjectManagementPlanEnterprise/
Organization4.4Monitor andControl ProjectWork
4.5Perform
IntegratedChange Control7.3Determine
BudgetFigure 7-11. 
Control Costs Data Flow DiagramLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.216©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTUpdating the budget requires knowledge of the actual costs spent to date. Any increase to the authorized 
budget can only be approved through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5). Monitoring the 

expenditure of funds without regard to the value of work being accomplished for such expenditures has little value 
to the project, other than to allow the project team to stay within the authorized funding. Much of the effort of cost 

control involves analyzing the relationship between the consumption of project funds to the physical work being 

accomplished for such expenditures. The key to effective cost control is the management of the approved cost 

baseline and the changes to that baseline.
Project cost control includes:
In˚uencing the factors that create changes to the authorized cost baseline;
Ensuring that all change requests are acted on in a timely manner;
Managing the actual changes when and as they occur;
 Ensuring that cost expenditures do not exceed the authorized funding by period, by WBS component, by 

activity, and in total for the project;
Monitoring cost performance to isolate and understand variances from the approved cost baseline;
Monitoring work performance against funds expended;
Preventing unapproved changes from being included in the reported cost or resource usage;
Informing appropriate stakeholders of all approved changes and associated cost; and
Bringing expected cost overruns within acceptable limits.7.4.1 Control Costs: Inputs7.4.1.1 Project Management PlanDescribed in Section 4.2.3.1. The project management plan contains the following information that is used to 
control cost: Cost baseline. 
The cost baseline is compared with actual results to determine if a change, corrective 
action, or preventive action is necessary.
 C
ost management plan. 
The cost management plan describes how the project costs will be managed 
and controlled (Section 7.1.3.1).Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.217©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.4.1.2 Project Funding RequirementsDescribed in Section 7.3.3.2. The project funding requirements include projected expenditures plus anticipated 

liabilities. 
7.4.1.3 Work Performance 
DataDescribed in Section 4.3.3.2. Work performance data includes information about project progress, such as 
which activities have started, their progress, and which deliverables have ˜nished. Information also includes costs 

that have been authorized and incurred.
7.4.1.4 Organizational Process AssetsDescribed in Section 2.1.4. The organizational process assets that can in˚uence the Control Costs process 
include, but are not limited to:
Existing formal and informal cost control-related policies, procedures, and guidelines;
Cost control tools; andMonitoring and reporting methods to be used.7.4.2 Control Costs: Tools and Techniques7.4.2.1 Earned Value Management
Earned value management (EVM) is a methodology that combines scope, schedule, and resource 
measurements to assess project performance and progress. It is a commonly used method of performance 

measurement for projects. It integrates the scope baseline with the cost baseline, along with the schedule 

baseline, to form the performance baseline, which helps the project management team assess and measure 

project performance and progress. It is a project management technique that requires the formation of an 

integrated baseline against which performance can be measured for the duration of the project. The principles 

of EVM can be applied to all projects in any industry. EVM develops and monitors three key dimensions for each 

work package and control account:
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.218©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT Planned value.
 Planned value (PV) is the authorized budget assigned to scheduled work. It is the 

authorized budget planned for the work to be accomplished for an activity or work breakdown structure 

component, not including management reserve. This budget is allocated by phase over the life of 

the project, but at a given moment, planned value de˜nes the physical work that should have been 

accomplished. The total of the PV is sometimes referred to as the performance measurement baseline 

(PMB). The total planned value for the project is also known as budget at completion (BAC).
 Earned value. 
Earned value (EV) is a measure of work performed expressed in terms of the budget 
authorized for that work. It is the budget associated with the authorized work that has been completed. 

The EV being measured needs to be related to the PMB, and the EV measured cannot be greater than the 

authorized PV budget for a component. The EV is often used to calculate the percent complete of a project. 

Progress measurement criteria should be established for each WBS component to measure work in 

progress. Project managers monitor EV, both incrementally to determine current status and cumulatively 

to determine the long-term performance trends. Actual cost. Actual cost (AC) is the realized cost incurred for the work performed on an activity during 

a speci˜c time period. It is the total cost incurred in accomplishing the work that the EV measured. The 

AC needs to correspond in de˜nition to what was budgeted in the PV and measured in the EV (e.g., 

direct hours only, direct costs only, or all costs including indirect costs). The AC will have no upper limit; 

whatever is spent to achieve the EV will be measured. 
Variances from the approved baseline will also be monitored:
 Schedule variance.
 Schedule variance (SV) is a measure of schedule performance expressed as the 

difference between the earned value and the planned value. It is the amount by which the project is ahead 

or behind the planned delivery date, at a given point in time. It is a measure of schedule performance on 

a project. It is equal to the earned value (EV) minus the planned value (PV). The EVM schedule variance is 

a useful metric in that it can indicate when a project is falling behind or is ahead of its baseline schedule. 

The EVM schedule variance will ultimately equal zero when the project is completed because all of the 

planned values will have been earned. Schedule variance is best used in conjunction with critical path 

methodology (CPM) scheduling and risk management. 
Equation
: SV = EV Œ PV
 Cost variance.
 Cost variance (CV) is the amount of budget de˜cit or surplus at a given point in time, 
expressed as the difference between earned value and the actual cost. It is a measure of cost performance 

on a project. It is equal to the earned value (EV) minus the actual cost (AC). The cost variance at the end 

of the project will be the difference between the budget at completion (BAC) and the actual amount spent. 

The CV is particularly critical because it indicates the relationship of physical performance to the costs 

spent. Negative CV is often dif˜cult for the project to recover. 
Equation
: CV= EV ˛ AC. 
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.219©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7The SV and CV values can be converted to ef˜ciency indicators to re˚ect the cost and schedule 

performance of any project for comparison against all other projects or within a portfolio of projects. The 

variances are useful for determining project status.
 Schedule performance index. 
The schedule performance index (SPI) is a measure of schedule ef˜ciency 

expressed as the ratio of earned value to planned value. It measures how ef˜ciently the project team is 

using its time. It is sometimes used in conjunction with the cost performance index (CPI) to forecast the 

˜nal project completion estimates. An SPI value less than 1.0 indicates less work was completed than 

was planned. An SPI greater than 1.0 indicates that more work was completed than was planned. Since 

the SPI measures all project work, the performance on the critical path also needs to be analyzed to 

determine whether the project will ˜nish ahead of or behind its planned ˜nish date. The SPI is equal to 

the ratio of the EV to the PV. Equation: SPI = EV/PV
 C
ost performance index. 
The cost performance index (CPI) is a measure of the cost ef˜ciency of budgeted 
resources, expressed as a ratio of earned value to actual cost. It is considered the most critical EVM 

metric and measures the cost ef˜ciency for the work completed. A CPI value of less than 1.0 indicates a 

cost overrun for work completed. A CPI value greater than 1.0 indicates a cost underrun of performance 

to date. The CPI is equal to the ratio of the EV to the AC. The indices are useful for determining project 

status and providing a basis for estimating project cost and schedule outcome. 
Equation
: CPI = EV/AC
The three parameters of planned value, earned value, and actual cost can be monitored and reported on both 
a period-by-period basis (typically weekly or monthly) and on a cumulative basis. Figure 7-12 uses S-curves to 

display EV data for a project that is performing over budget and behind the schedule.
BAC
ETCProject BudgetManagement Reserve
Planned
Value (PV)
Earned

Value (PV)
Actual
Cost (AC)
EAC
Time
Cumulative CostData DateFigure 7-12. Earned Value, Planned Value, and Actual 
CostsLicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.220©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7.4.2.2 ForecastingAs the project progresses, the project team may develop a forecast for the estimate at completion (EAC) that 
may differ from the budget at completion (BAC) based on the project performance. If it becomes obvious that the 

BAC is no longer viable, the project manager should consider the forecasted EAC. Forecasting the EAC involves 

making projections of conditions and events in the project™s future based on current performance information 

and other knowledge available at the time of the forecast. Forecasts are generated, updated, and reissued based 

on work performance data (Section 4.3.3.2) that is provided as the project is executed. The work performance 

information covers the project™s past performance and any information that could impact the project in the future.
EACs are typically based on the actual costs incurred for work completed, plus an estimate to complete (ETC) 
the remaining work. It is incumbent on the project team to predict what it may encounter to perform the ETC, based 

on its experience to date. The EVM method works well in conjunction with manual forecasts of the required EAC 

costs. The most common EAC forecasting approach is a manual, bottom-up summation by the project manager 

and project team.The project manager™s bottom-up EAC method builds upon the actual costs and experience incurred for 
the work completed, and requires a new estimate to complete the remaining project work. Equation: EAC =  

AC + Bottom-up ETC.The project manager™s manual EAC is quickly compared with a range of calculated EACs representing various 
risk scenarios. When calculating EAC values, the cumulative CPI and SPI values are typically used. While EVM data 

quickly provide many statistical EACs, only three of the more common methods are described as follows:
 EAC forecast for ETC work performed at the budgeted rate. 
This EAC method accepts the actual project performance to date (whether favorable or unfavorable) as represented by the actual costs, and 

predicts that all future ETC work will be accomplished at the budgeted rate. When actual performance 

is unfavorable, the assumption that future performance will improve should be accepted only when 

supported by project risk analysis. 
Equation
: EAC = AC + (BAC Œ EV)
 EAC forecast for ETC work performed at the present CPI. This method assumes what the project has 
experienced to date can be expected to continue in the future. The ETC work is assumed to be performed 

at the same cumulative cost performance index (CPI) as that incurred by the project to date. 
Equation
: 
EAC = BAC / CPILicensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.221©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7 EAC forecast for ETC work considering both SPI and CPI factors.
 In this forecast, the ETC work will 
be performed at an ef˜ciency rate that considers both the cost and schedule performance indices. This 

method is most useful when the project schedule is a factor impacting the ETC effort. Variations of this 

method weight the CPI and SPI at different values (e.g., 80/20, 50/50, or some other ratio) according to 

the project manager™s judgment. 
Equation
: EAC = AC + [(BAC Œ EV) / (CPI × SPI)]
Each of these approaches is applicable for any given project and will provide the project management team with 
an ﬁearly warningﬂ signal if the EAC forecasts are not within acceptable tolerances.
7.4.2.3 To-Complete Performance Index (
TCPI)The to-complete performance index (TCPI) is a measure of the cost performance that is required to be achieved 
with the remaining resources in order to meet a speci˜ed management goal, expressed as the ratio of the cost to 

˜nish the outstanding work to the remaining budget. TCPI is the calculated cost performance index that is achieved 

on the remaining work to meet a speci˜ed management goal, such as the BAC or the EAC. If it becomes obvious 

that the BAC is no longer viable, the project manager should consider the forecasted EAC. Once approved, the EAC 

may replace the BAC in the TCPI calculation. The equation for the TCPI based on the BAC: (BAC Œ EV) / (BAC Œ AC).
The TCPI is conceptually displayed in Figure 7-13. The equation for the TCPI is shown in the lower left as the 
work remaining (de˜ned as the BAC minus the EV) divided by the funds remaining (which can be either the BAC 
minus the AC, or the EAC minus the AC).
If the cumulative CPI falls below the baseline (as shown in Figure 7-13), all future work of the project will need 
to be performed immediately in the range of the TCPI (BAC) (as re˚ected in the top line of Figure 7-13) to stay 

within the authorized BAC. Whether this level of performance is achievable is a judgment call based on a number 

of considerations, including risk, schedule, and technical performance. This level of performance is displayed as 

the TCPI (EAC) line. The equation for the TCPI based on the EAC: (BAC Œ EV) / (EAC Œ AC). The EVM formulas are 

provided in Table 7-1.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.222©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTStatus Date1.00>1
<1TCPI
(BAC)
TCPI
(EAC)
Baseline PlanCumulative
CPIFormula:
= TCPIWork Remaining
 (BAC-EV)
Funds Remaining (BAC-AC) or (EAC-AC)
Figure 7-13. 
To-Complete Performance Index (
TCPI)7.4.2.4 Performance 
ReviewsPerformance reviews compare cost performance over time, schedule activities or work packages overrunning 
and underrunning the budget, and estimated funds needed to complete work in progress. If EVM is being used, the 

following information is determined:
 Variance analysis.
 Variance analysis, as used in EVM, is the explanation (cause, impact, and corrective 

actions) for cost (CV = EV Œ AC), schedule (SV = EV Œ PV), and variance at completion (VAC = BAC Œ EAC) 

variances. Cost and schedule variances are the most frequently analyzed measurements. For projects 

not using earned value management, similar variance analyses can be performed by comparing planned 

activity cost against actual activity cost to identify variances between the cost baseline and actual 

project performance. Further analysis can be performed to determine the cause and degree of variance 

relative to the schedule baseline and any corrective or preventative actions needed. Cost performance 

measurements are used to assess the magnitude of variation to the original cost baseline. An important 

aspect of project cost control includes determining the cause and degree of variance relative to the 

cost baseline (Section 7.3.3.1) and deciding whether corrective or preventive action is required. The 

percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease as more work is accomplished.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.223©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT7 Trend analysis. 
Trend analysis examines project performance over time to determine if performance is 
improving or deteriorating. Graphical analysis techniques are valuable for understanding performance 

to date and for comparison to future performance goals in the form of BAC versus EAC and completion 

dates.
 Earned value performance.
 Earned value performance compares the performance measurement 

baseline to actual schedule and cost performance. If EVM is not being used, then the analysis of the cost 

baseline against actual costs for the work performed is used for cost performance comparisons.
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.224©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENTTable 7-1. Earned Value 
Calculations Summary 
TableEarned Value Analysis
Lexicon DefinitionHow UsedEquationAbbreviationName
Interpretation of ResultThe authorized budget assigned to 
scheduled work.
The measure of work performed 
expressed in terms of the budget 
authorized for that work.
The realized cost incurred for the 
work performed on an activity during 
a specific time period.
The sum of all budgets established 
for the work to be performed.

The amount of budget deficit or 
surplus at a given point in time, 
expressed as the difference between 
the earned value and the actual cost.

The amount by which the project is 
ahead or behind the planned 
delivery date, at a given point in 

time, expressed as the difference 

between the earned value and the 

planned value.
A projection of the amount of budget 

deficit or surplus, expressed as the 

difference between the budget at 

completion and the estimate at 
completion.
A measure of the cost efficiency of 
budgeted resources 

expressed as the ratio of earned 

value to actual cost.
A measure of schedule efficiency 
expressed as the ratio of earned 

value to planned value.
The expected total cost of com-
pleting all work expressed as the 

sum of the actual cost to date and 
the estimate to complete.
The expected cost to finish all the 
remaining project work.
A measure of the cost performance 

that must be achieved with the 

remaining resources in order to meet 
a specified management goal, 

expressed as the ratio of the cost to 
finish the outstanding work to the 

budget available.
Planned 
Value
Earned Value
Actual Cost
 
Budget at 
Completion
Cost Variance
Schedule 
Variance
Variance at 

Completion
Cost 
Performance 

Index
Schedule 
Performance 

Index
Estimate At 
Completion
Estimate to 
Complete
To Complete 
Performance 
IndexPV
EV
AC
 
BAC
CV
SV
VAC
CPI
SPI
EAC
ETC
TCPIThe value of the work planned to be 
completed to a point in time, usually 
the data date, or project completion.
The planned value of all the work 
completed (earned) to a point in 
time, usually the data date, without 
reference to actual costs. 
The actual cost of all the work 
completed to a point in time, usually 
the data date.
The value of total planned work, the 
project cost baseline.
The difference between the value of 
work completed to a point in time, 
usually the data date, and the actual 
costs to the same point in time.
The difference between the work 
completed to a point in time, usually 
the data date, and the work planned 
to be completed to the same point 
in time.
The estimated difference in cost at 
the completion of the project.
A CPI of 1.0 means the project is 
exactly on budget, that the work 

actually done so far is exactly the 
same as the cost so far. Other values 

show the percentage of how much 

costs are over or under the budgeted 

amount for work accomplished.
An SPI of 1.0 means that the project 
is exactly on schedule,  that the work 

actually done so far is exactly the 
same as the work planned to be 

done so far. Other values show the 
percentage of how much costs are 

over or under the budgeted amount 

for work planned.
If the CPI is expected to be the same 
for the remainder of the project, EAC 

can be calculated using:
If future work will be accomplished 
at the planned rate, use:

If the initial plan is no longer valid, 
use:
If both the CPI and SPI influence the 
remaining work, use:
Assuming work is proceeding on 

plan, the cost of completing the 

remaining authorized work can be 

calculated using:
Reestimate the remaining work from 
the bottom up.
The efficiency that must be 
maintained in order to complete on 
plan.
The efficiency that must be 
maintained in order to complete the 
current EAC.
EV = sum of the planned
value of completed work
CV = EV Œ AC
SV = EV Œ PV
VAC = BAC Œ EAC
CPI = EV/AC 
SPI = EV/PV
EAC = BAC/CPI  
EAC = AC + BAC Œ EV
EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC
EAC = AC + [(BAC Œ EV)/
         (CPI x SPI)]
ETC = EAC Œ AC
ETC = Reestimate
TCPI = (BAC Œ EV)/(BAC Œ AC)
TCPI = (BAC Œ EV)/(EAC Œ AC)
Positive = Under planned cost                 
Neutral = On planned cost                    
Negative = Over planned cost
 
Positiv
e = Ahead of Schedule               
Neutral = On schedule                              
Negative = Behind Schedule
Positive = Under planned cost                 

Neutral = On planned cost                    
Negative = Over planned cost
Greater than 1.0 = Under planned
 cost

Exactly 1.0 = On planned cost             
Less than 1.0 = Over planned cost
Greater than 1.0 = Ahead of

 schedule

Exactly 1.0 = On schedule                              
Less than 1.0 = Behind schedule            
Greater than 1.0 = Harder to
  complete

Exactly 1.0 = Same to complete               
Less than 1.0 = Easier to complete            
Greater than 1.0 = Harder to
 complete 

Exactly 1.0 = Same to complete               
Less than 1.0 = Easier to complete Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.225©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT77.4.2.5 Project Management SoftwareProject management software is often used to monitor the three EVM dimensions (PV, EV, and AC), to display 
graphical trends, and to forecast a range of possible ˜nal project results.
7.4.2.6 Reserve Analysis
During cost control, reserve analysis is used to monitor the status of contingency and management reserves 
for the project to determine if these reserves are still needed or if additional reserves need to be requested. 

As work on the project progresses, these reserves may be used as planned to cover the cost of risk mitigation 

events or other contingencies. Or, if the probable risk events do not occur, the unused contingency reserves 

may be removed from the project budget to free up resources for other projects or operations. Additional risk 

analysis during the project may reveal a need to request that additional reserves be added to the project budget. 

Management and contingency reserves are addressed in more detail in Section 7.2.2.6.
7.4.3 Control Costs: Outputs7.4.3.1 Work Performance Information
The calculated CV, SV, CPI, SPI, TCPI, and VAC values for WBS components, in particular the work packages and 
control accounts, are documented and communicated to stakeholders.
7.4.3.2 Cost ForecastsEither a calculated EAC value or a bottom-up EAC value is documented and communicated to stakeholders.
7.4.3.3 Change RequestsAnalysis of project performance may result in a change request to the cost baseline or other components of the project management plan. Change requests may include preventive or corrective actions, and are processed for 

review and disposition through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5).
7.4.3.4 Project Management Plan UpdatesElements of the project management plan that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.226©2013 Project Management Institute.
 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
® Guide) Œ Fifth Edition 
7 - PROJECT COST MANAGEMENT Cost baseline. 
Changes to the cost baseline are incorporated in response to approved changes in scope, 
activity resources, or cost estimates. In some cases, cost variances can be so severe that a revised cost 

baseline is needed to provide a realistic basis for performance measurement. C
ost management plan. Changes to the cost management plan, such as changes to control thresholds 
or speci˜ed levels of accuracy required in managing the project™s cost, are incorporated in response to 

feedback from relevant stakeholders.7.4.3.5 Project Documents UpdatesProject documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Cost estimates, and
Basis of estimates.
7.4.3.6 Organizational Process Assets UpdatesOrganizational process assets that may be updated include, but are not limited to:
Causes of variances,Corrective action chosen and the reasons,Financial databases, and
Other types of lessons learned from project cost control.Licensed To: Jorge Diego Fuentes Sanchez PMI MemberID: 2399412This copy is a PMI Member benefit, not for distribution, sale, or reproduction.